Disc brakes are the most modern iteration of the bicycle brake. They can be constructed with cables, known as mechanical disc brakes, or fluid, known as hydraulic disc brakes, or a combination of both. In this series of videos, we’ll focus on hydraulic disc brakes. The purpose of braking is to reduce the rotation speed of the wheels. This might be to slow the bike and the rider down, or to stop completely. It could also be to break traction if the rider is looking to slide or skid. It could even be to help manipulate the bike during more technical riding. In each of these cases, the relationship between the rider input and the performance of the brake is very important. While rider input is entirely up to the rider, the performance of the brake begins with how the brake is designed. Before we get into all of the technology involved with hydraulic disc brakes, it’s helpful that we understand why they are important on bicycles. Hydraulic brakes can be designed to be very powerful by manipulating leverage a number of ways. A system that uses fluid instead of a cable to transmit power suffers from significantly less power loss to friction. By using leverage and system flex, lever feel can be manipulated. And that feel can be made consistent between the front and rear brake. Contamination affects brake feel and power less with a disc brake than a rim brake since the rotor is further away from dirt, water, and mud than the bottom of the wheel. Moving the brake track to the rotor eliminates rim wear. Replacing a worn rim is significantly more time-consuming and expensive than replacing a rotor. And if the rim is damaged or out of true, the brake function and feel do not change. In this series of videos, we’ll take a look at key design aspects of hydraulic disc brakes, how they affect the overall braking picture, and other details that are helpful to understand when using hydraulic disc brakes. In our next video, we’ll take a look at how hydraulic disc brakes work in greater detail.