In a hydraulic brake system, braking force is transmitted by pushing fluid through the system rather than pulling a cable. This begins with the rider actuating the brake lever. The brake lever pivots on the lever body and is attached to a cam or push rod. Inside the lever body is a lever cylinder, and inside of that is the lever piston. The cam or push rod connects the lever to the piston. When the brake lever is actuated, force is transmitted from the lever to the lever piston, which creates pressure against the fluid. This pressure is transmitted through the brake fluid to the caliper. Inside of the caliper are caliper cylinders and caliper pistons. Pressure from the fluid is applied to the caliper pistons, which create a force that is applied to the brake pads, clamping them against the rotor. Let’s take a look at each of these components in detail, starting with the brake lever. Brake levers are commonly arranged in of two configurations: radial, where the lever cylinder is arranged perpendicular to the handlebar, and axial or inline, where the lever cylinder is more parallel. Inline levers are class one levers, meaning the fulcrum, or pivot, is oriented between the lever and the piston. Radial levers are class two levers, with the lever piston oriented between the lever and the pivot. Each type offers benefits that are taken into account when being applied to the overall design of a brake system. Many inline designs have the advantage of placing the pivot a similar distance from the handlebar as the lever when the lever has been actuated to the point where the pads contact the rotor. One principle of leverage is that optimal leverage is achieved when the actuator, in this case the rider’s finger, is working perpendicular to the lever. Designing the lever so that the rider’s finger is perpendicular to the lever as the pads contact the rotor assures that the transfer of energy is optimized when it matters the most. Radial designs typically place the pivot at a similar distance from the handlebar as the point where the lever starts its rotation. This means that the lever starts at an optimal leverage position and moves away from it as the pads contact the rotor. Also, radial designs offer a more direct transfer of energy between the lever and the lever cylinder, which allows for more perceptible feedback at the lever. From the lever, we move to the hose. The function of the hose is fairly simple in that it connects the lever to the caliper and allows fluid to move between them. However, the design of the hose does play a role in braking power and feel. Hoses are designed to withstand very high amounts of pressure without expanding significantly or breaking. Any expansion that does occur results in a less efficient transfer of energy from the lever to the caliper, but gives the lever a more gradual feel, allowing for more controlled, nuanced braking. From the hose we move to the caliper. Calipers can be mounted to the bike in one of two ways, also referred to as axial or radial. Axial, also known as International Standard or I.S. mount, places the mounting bolts perpendicular to the rotor. I.S. mounting is simple and requires little more than two holes in the fork or frame that are parallel to the rotor. However, being placed perpendicular to torque produced by the braking force makes them prone to flex, which reduces power transfer efficiency. And when using larger rotors, this is amplified. Radial, or post mount, places the caliper mounting bolts parallel to the rotor. Post mounting is more complex for frame and fork manufacturers to design around since it requires threads that are parallel to the rotor as well as a mounting platform that is perpendicular to the rotor. However, the benefits are increased power and less flex, since the caliper is in line with torque produced by the braking force and mounted on a more rigid platform supported directly by the fork or frame. Inside the caliper, the caliper pistons use specials seals that are designed to not only keep fluid in and contaminants out, but also to act as return springs to pull the pistons and pads back to their resting position once the lever is released. This is called rollback. The amount of rollback directly correlates to the amount of clearance between the pads and the rotor. This clearance is a significant factor in determining deadband, which is how much lever movement is necessary to move the pads from their resting position to the rotor. Managing rollback is important as pad clearance helps to prevent the buildup of contaminants, allows air flow for cooling, and determines the brake’s tolerance to inconsistencies in rotor straightness, known as runout. Managing deadband is important as it affects lever ergonomics and power transfer. Another function of the caliper piston seals is to allow the pistons to self-adjust to compensate for pad and rotor wear. Pads and rotors get thinner as they wear, which increases rollback and deadband. In cable actuated systems, this is compensated for by either increasing cable tension or repositioning pads, both of which require a person to make an adjustment. Since pads and rotors constantly wear with use, constant adjustment is needed. In hydraulic disc brakes, the caliper piston seals flex with piston movement, but only up to certain point. After that, the pistons slip through the seals until the pads contact the rotor. This repositions the pistons in relation to the seals. When the lever is released, the pistons move back into the caliper to come to rest in a new position, closer to the rotor. This self-advancement process allows the system to maintain consistent rollback and deadband without the need for a person to make adjustments. At least until the pads and rotor wear to their minimum thickness dimensions, at which point they will need to be replaced and the pistons will need to be manually returned to their original resting positions inside the caliper. In our next video, we’ll take a look at open and closed brake systems.