Depending on the intended use of the brake, designers may choose between a closed or open brake system. Closed systems are simple. Fluid is contained entirely within the lever cylinder, the hose, and the caliper cylinder. When the lever is actuated, the fluid is pressurized, and the pads move toward the rotor. When the lever is released, the fluid pressure is released, and the caliper pistons and pads move back to their resting positions. The simplicity of this design may sound compelling, but it fails to take into account a very important and inescapable aspect of braking, heat. The whole concept of braking is based on converting kinetic energy, which is the energy of motion, into heat. Brake pads clamping against a moving brake track produce friction, which produces heat. The more the brakes are used to reduce speed, the more heat is generated. This heat radiates into the caliper. The caliper contains brake fluid, and most fluids, regardless of how well they’ve been bled, have some gases suspended in them in the form of very small bubbles. Fluids and gases expand when heated. So, any these very small bubbles located in the caliper will increase in size as the caliper gets hotter. As they grow, they apply pressure to the fluid they are suspended in. In a closed system, this creates pressure against both the lever and the caliper pistons, which reduces deadband. Once the lever is released, the remaining pressure pushes the caliper pistons toward the rotor, reducing pad clearance. At least until the system cools and depressurizes. Open systems are similar to closed systems, but with one very important difference. A reservoir with additional fluid and a volume of empty space is located adjacent to the lever cylinder. The fluid is separated from the empty volume by a flexible bladder. The reservoir and the lever cylinder are connected by a series of ports. This design has three benefits. The first benefit is that the reservoir acts as an air trap. Air in a hydraulic brake system affects performance by disrupting the transmission of fluid pressure from the lever to the caliper. Fluids are incompressible. This means that any force applied to a fluid won’t change its volume or density. Instead, it gets transmitted through the fluid to other, more flexible components. In the case of hydraulic disc brakes, these are the caliper pistons and seals. On the other hand, gases are compressible. So, any gases suspended in the fluid will absorb the pressure rather than transmit it. At best, a little air in the system may produce a soft, or spongy feeling lever. At worst, a lot of air in the system, and the brakes just don’t work. This is why removing as much air as possible during a brake bleed is very important. The good news is, brake fluid is heavier than air, so any air that does get trapped in the system will eventually work its way to the highest point in the system, which, in the case of an open system brake, is the reservoir. As the lever is actuated and the lever piston moves through the lever cylinder, the reservoir is isolated from the rest of the system, and any gases inside the reservoir have no effect on braking performance. The second benefit is compensation. Fluid pressure created by heating very small bubbles or water absorption into the system will flex the bladder in the reservoir instead of pushing the caliper pistons toward the rotor. In the event that heat creates this pressure during braking, the lever does need to be released momentarily for the pressurized fluid to gain access to the reservoir. This is why a temporary loss of deadband during extended braking, known as pump up, can be recovered by quickly releasing and reapplying the brake. These two benefits create a more consistent and tolerant system, especially when heat is a concern. And the larger the reservoir, the larger the negative volume, and the more tolerant the system. The third benefit of an open system is that the position of the lever piston in relation to the ports determines the amount of deadband. Since the bladder is flexible, any pressure created by actuating the lever flexes the bladder instead of moving the caliper pistons, until the lever piston crosses over the ports. Once this happens, the bladder is removed from the active system and lever actuation begins to move the caliper pistons. By adding adjustability to the position of the piston in relation to the ports, deadband can be adjusted to rider preference without changing the position of the pads. In our next video, we’ll take a look at how leverage helps to generate power in a hydraulic brake system.