Total system braking power is determined by mechanical advantage, or leverage, the friction coefficients of the pads and rotor, and the diameter of the rotor. Leverage is a means of taking an input force and using distance to manipulate the output force. When you use a lever to lift something, you’re using your own strength multiplied by the leverage ratio of the lever to produce enough output force to lift the object. If you increase your own output, the output force at the end of the lever also increases. If you increase the leverage ratio, the output force increases. The leverage ratio can be increased by lengthening the lever on the input side of the pivot point, or fulcrum. It can also be increased by shortening the lever on the output side of the fulcrum. And it can be increased by moving the fulcrum closer to the object you’re lifting. These are basic principles of leverage, but they’re very important when talking about many parts of the bicycle, especially the brakes. Leverage can also be manipulated within a hydraulic system by manipulating the sizes of the lever and caliper pistons. As I mentioned earlier, the force created when you actuate the brake lever is transmitted to the lever piston and applied to the fluid. This creates pressure in the fluid. So, as a bike mechanic, or someone who’s ever even ridden a bicycle, you’ve probably checked and adjusted tire pressure, at least once in your life. And when you do so, you probably reference a formula that we use to describe the relationship between force and pressure. So, in my case, I run twenty-five in my rear tire. Twenty-five what? In my case, that’s twenty-five psi. And what does psi stand for? It stands for pounds per square inch. And another way that we can write that is pounds over inches squared. And we’re talking about pressure. Now, if we look at each of these components individually, pounds references force whereas inches squared references area. So, pressure equals force over area. Now, if you use bar, that’s ok because bar converts to something very similar, whereas one bar equals one hundred-thousand newtons per meters squared. And if we look at Newtons, again, that references force. Meters squared references area. So, pressure once again, equals force over area. And if we do a little bit of math, multiply both sides by area, these cross out, area times pressure equals force. When you consider this with brakes, the force that you produce when actuating the lever is multiplied by the leverage ratio of the lever. This is the force at the piston. Divide this by the surface area of the piston to determine the fluid pressure. Down at the caliper, multiply the fluid pressure by the surface area of the pistons on one side of the caliper. Why only one side? Because in this case the clamping force is created by a single pressure applied to two equal areas pressing against each other, not with each other. You could think of this as the pistons on one side of the caliper being fixed and the fluid pressure only being applied to the pistons on the other side of the caliper. The clamping force on both sides of the rotor is still the same. Now, let’s go back to that whole ‘leverage can be manipulated by changing the sizes of the pistons’ thing. The basic premise of leverage is a relationship between force and distance. Now, let’s look at that in terms of a hydraulic disc brake, starting at the lever piston. Typically, the lever piston is much smaller than the caliper piston, which means that somewhere in the fluid column, the size of the column actually changes. And we know that we’ve got to get the fluid through a hose, which means that it changes a couple of times. Now, when we move the lever piston a certain distance, it’s going to displace a certain amount of fluid, which goes through the hose and into the caliper cylinder. Now, relative to the size of the caliper cylinder, that much fluid isn’t very much. So, the caliper piston isn’t going to move very much. Now, let’s look at this in terms of leverage. If we have a fairly high leverage ratio, we know that a lot of movement on one side of the lever translates to a little movement on the other. But there’s the force amplification, so that a little bit of force on this side translates to a lot of force on this side. Same thing applies here. I mentioned leverage ratio, which, in a hydraulic system can also be referred to as a piston ratio, which is the ratio of the surface area of one of the pistons in the caliper over the surface area of the piston in the lever. When manipulating piston ratios and dimensions, other factors besides just braking power need to be considered. Lever pistons and seals need to be large enough to be durable, but small enough that the lever isn’t excessively large or heavy. Once a lever piston dimension is established, the desired piston ratio requires a specific dimension of caliper piston. However, a caliper piston with a specific diameter must be paired with an appropriately sized caliper body, brake pad, and rotor brake track. For pads and rotors, this isn’t much of an issue. But because caliper bodies are forced apart as the pistons and pads clamp onto the rotor, increasing the height of the caliper will allow for more caliper flex when braking. So, one way to control flex at the caliper is to divide the overall surface area at the caliper cylinder over multiple pistons. This allows for an equivalent surface area at the caliper pistons without excessive caliper height. And less height translates to less flex. In addition to offering more options for caliper dimensions, this also adds more possibilities for noise mitigation and modulation. If the pistons on each side of the caliper have different surfaces areas, force and movement can be manipulated. This idea relates to a technique used on rim brakes where the pads are adjusted so that the trailing end of the pad contacts the rim just slightly before the leading edge. This is call toe-ing in the pads, and it’s very effective in reducing vibration and noise. On a four-piston disc caliper, leverage dictates that the smaller pistons will move more with a given pressure, but the larger pads will produce more force with the same pressure. So, putting the two smaller pistons at the leading edge pushes the front of the pad to the rotor first, which helps clear debris from the brake track. But then the hydraulic pressure creates more clamping force against the larger pistons at the trailing end of the pad, effectively toe-ing in the pad. What makes the whole leverage picture even more interesting is the fact that leverage can change as the brake is actuated. This is referred to as modulation. If leverage increases through actuation, the system is said to have rising-rate modulation. If leverage decreases through actuation, the system is said to have falling-rate modulation. And if the leverage doesn’t change through actuation, the system is said to have linear, or no modulation. Modulation is often confused with lever feel. There is a correlation, but it’s not as direct as many people think. Brakes that have a lot of power tend to produce a softer or mushy feeling lever. This is because high force and pressure allows any flex in the system to become more perceptible to the rider. So, a brake that becomes more powerful as the pads clamp onto the rotor can also feel softer, depending on how much flex is in the system. The right type and amount of modulation in a system can be a very good thing. It can allow the rider to exert more control over braking and overall riding by offering a wide range of available braking forces. One example of how a system can modulate goes back to a point I mentioned when talking about radial versus inline levers. Levers that are designed to be parallel to the handlebar as the pads clamp onto the rotor develop more leverage as the brakes are actuated than levers that start parallel to the bar, which begin with peak leverage, and move away from it during actuation. Some systems are designed with a cam mechanism in the lever to further manage leverage and modulation at the lever. By designing the lever to start from a relatively low leverage ratio, which favors movement over power, the gap between the pads and the rotor can be closed quickly during initial actuation. Then, as the system modulates to a higher leverage ratio closer to the point of pad and rotor contact, the amount of pad movement per lever movement decreases, but the available power increases. This allows the gap to be larger, which is ideal for mud clearance and airflow for heat management, without introducing excessive deadband or insufficient leverage. Modulation can also be manipulated in four-piston calipers with multiple piston diameters. Since the pads contact the rotors with more force applied to the pads’ trailing edge, braking power increases as clamping force is distributed across the pad. Rotor size also uses leverage to control braking power. If you consider a spinning wheel as the mass on one side of the lever, braking power applied to the brake track as the lifting force on the other side of the lever, and the axle to be the fulcrum, the same rules of leverage apply. By changing the brake track’s diameter, the leverage ratio changes, and the amount of force required to stop the wheel’s spin also changes. It’s also worth mentioning that human physiology plays a role with leverage. Grip strength increases as our fingers get closer to our palms. So, if the lever is set up with very little deadband, the potential for actuation force isn’t as high as it could be with more deadband. Finally, grip and glove thicknesses are also worth considering. In our next video, we’ll take a look at friction in a disc brake system.