The last component to consider with total braking power is friction. When hydraulic pressure is applied to the caliper pistons, a force is created and transmitted through the brake pads on either side of the rotor to create a clamping force against the rotor. The brake pad material has what’s called a coefficient of friction, which is a value used to describe how much resistance to movement two parts have when pressed against each other by a force. For a brake, the pad and rotor materials are the components and the force applied by the caliper pistons to the pads is the force. Brake pads and rotors function on two principles, adherent and abrasive friction. Adherent friction begins by depositing of a thin transfer layer of pad material onto the rotor during an initial burnishing, or bed-in process. Once this layer is established, brake application creates molecular bonds between the pads and the transfer layer on the rotor that are instantaneously established, then immediately broken. This creates momentary grip, then release, then grip again, then release again, over and over until the wheel stops spinning or the brake is released. And all of this happens quickly enough to not be felt by the rider. Without the transfer layer this does not occur, which is why brand new brakes are less powerful than brakes that have been ridden and bedded in. If the transfer layer is applied unevenly, braking may produce vibration at the rotor. This may not be apparent at first, but as the transfer layer continues to build unevenly while riding, the vibration will intensify. This vibration then resonates through the rotor, the wheel, and the rest of the bike. If the natural harmonic frequency of the components matches the harmonic frequency of the vibration, the components can amplify the vibration, producing a variety of braking-induced sounds. These sounds can also vary depending on braking force, contamination, exposure to water, and other external contributors, as these can alter the coefficient of friction. The first step in mitigating brake noise is an even application of the transfer layer. But this alone won’t guarantee silent braking as external contributors and component resonance can only be controlled to a limited degree. Brakes pads can be constructed using different friction materials. Metallic pads are formed using high heat and pressure with metallic materials, whereas organic pads are made with an adhesive resin and organic materials. The exact make up of most brake pads is proprietary information. Different pad materials have different coefficients of friction, as well as different wear resistance, and tolerance to heat. Typically, metallic pads are more resistant to heat and wear, but have a lower coefficient of friction. Organic pads grip better, but wear faster and are less tolerant to high heat. So, which pad compound should you run? Well, that depends on the type of riding you plan to do and where you plan to do it. Metal-sintered pads tend to last longer over a wide range of conditions. For example, if you’re planning a long bike trip that takes you though various climate zones and a variety of terrain, metal-sintered pads will likely last longer than organic pads. Also, because metal-sintered pads manage heat better than organic pads, periods of extended braking, like coming down mountain passes, will be better served with metallic pads. Organic pads are grippier and can deliver more braking power quicker during actuation. This can be useful when braking during more performance-oriented riding like technical descents or navigating though high-traffic areas. Finally, organic pads tend to be quieter than metallic pads. So, if all other factors are accounted for and noise mitigation is the main goal, organic pads are the better option. When experiencing brake noise, switching from one type of pad to another may reduce or eliminate noise as it alters the resonance scenario at the source. However, it’s important to install a new rotor as well, since it’s possible that the transfer layer of the old pad material interacting with the new pad material will produce a different, or worse vibration. Of course, bedding in the new pad material is also crucial to ensuring the best possible resonance mitigation. The other principle on which brake pads and rotors function is abrasive friction. Abrasive friction is what converts the energy of motion into heat by breaking down the surfaces of the brake pads and the rotor. Abrasive friction is very effective in slowing down a spinning wheel, but it’s also the primary cause of pad and rotor wear. So, a high quality braking system strikes a good balance between adherent and abrasive friction. In our next video, we’ll take a look at heat management.