Because the purpose of braking is to convert kinetic energy into heat, heat is unavoidable in braking. Unfortunately, excessive heat can be detrimental to braking. So, careful steps must be taken to ensure that heat is managed in a way that doesn’t reduce the brake’s performance capabilities. And since it is a bicycle, attention must also be paid to weight. Braking power can decrease over an extended period of use. This is called fade, and there are two types of fade, friction and vapor fade. Friction fade occurs when the brake pad friction material overheats to a point outside of the design specifications. Pad material that has reached this point can exhibit a decrease in its friction coefficient, indicated by a change in appearance from a dull surface to a more shiny, glazed surface. When braking, this can be felt as little to no increase in braking power despite the lever being pulled with more force. Excessive heat at the pad/rotor interface can also cause the rotor to warp. When this happens, the brake track is no longer able to align to the pads properly, so the rotor must be replaced. And if a high enough temperature is reached to warp the rotor, the pads will also need to be replaced. Rotors may also change in appearance to a brown or even purple hue when subjected to high heat, but this doesn’t indicate a change in performance capability or durability. Ways to avoid friction fade include the use of high-performance brake pads, and reducing speed by using shorter periods of medium to firm braking versus dragging the brakes over long periods of time. Vapor fade is caused by the boiling of fluid in the brake system. Boiling is when the temperature of a fluid rises to a point where the fluid vaporizes, meaning, it changes its physical state to a gas. As a fluid’s temperature increases, its density decreases, which causes the volume of the fluid to increase. And depending on the type of fluid, it may require more or less heat to expand and vaporize. High-performance brake fluids have very high boiling points. But everything has its limits, and just like friction fade, good braking technique can help to avoid vapor fade. Also important in managing heat is proper maintenance of the system. As mentioned in a previous video, any gases that are suspended in the brake fluid will expand when heated, producing a number of adverse effects. So proper bleeding of the system is very important. Also, some brake fluids, specifically DOT fluids, are hygroscopic. This means that they absorb and mix with water. Given the opportunity, they will actually absorb moisture from the air. This can occur when the fluid is exposed directly to air during handling or storage, or as water molecules pass through porous components such as hoses and seals. Once the water enters the system, it mixes with the brake fluid to bring the overall fluid’s boiling point down slightly. This will render the system less tolerant to extreme temperatures. Mineral oils are another common type of brake fluid. Mineral oils used in bicycle brakes are generally proprietary and very specific to the types of brakes they were developed for. This means that servicing a mineral oil system requires the use of a very specific type of fluid, versus DOT fluid which is regulated in a way that provides compatibility and consistent performance characteristics, regardless of brand. Mineral oils can have higher boiling points than DOT fluid. This means that a system free of water will be more tolerant to extreme heat. However, mineral oil is hydrophobic, which means that it does not mix with water. And mineral oil is lighter than water. So, any water that does enter the system will remain localized at the lowest point in the system, which is the caliper. And since the caliper is the point in the fluid column that receives the most heat, mineral oil systems can have a more drastic reaction to water contamination. One last point on fluid types; DOT fluids maintain a consistent viscosity at very low temperatures. Depending on the manufacturer, some mineral oil viscosities will increase significantly at temperatures that riders may ride in. The result is a change in lever feel as thicker fluid requires more force to move into the hose. But regardless of the fluid type, periodic replacement of the brake fluid will ensure that the system can function optimally through a broad temperature range. Another way to make the system more tolerant to heat is to use larger diameter rotors. This helps in a number of ways. It provides more leverage to slow the wheels’ rotation with less braking force and friction. It also forces the brake track to travel faster through the air per wheel rotation. This provides greater airflow to cool the brake track. Finally, a large rotor has more mass, and more mass is more material for the heat to radiate to instead of building in one location. In addition to larger rotors, design features of a rotor can help with heat dissipation. Adding cutouts to the rotor is a way to not only reduce weight, but also provide more and closer access for heat within the rotor material to move to multiple surfaces where it can dissipate into the air. Of course, removing material from the rotor reduces its thermal mass, which can make the rotor more prone to deformation. So, a balance between thermal mass and convection, as well as maintaining structural integrity must be considered when designing a rotor for heat management. In our next and final video, we’ll take a look maintaining hydraulic disc brakes.