When a rider applies force to the pedals, the force is transmitted into the crankarms. From that point, a number of factors determines how much of that force is transmitted into the drivetrain; the length of the crankarms, the angle at which the load is applied to the crankarms, the stiffness of the overall crankset, and the size of the chainrings. One of the basic principles of leverage is that the length of the lever on one side of the pivot, or fulcrum, divided by the length of the lever on the other side creates a leverage ratio. The higher the leverage ratio, the more the lever has to move on the input side to get the output side to move a certain distance. However, force applied to the input side is amplified through the lever to the output side, and the higher the leverage ratio, the greater the amplification. When looking at this from the perspective of a crankset, the crankarm is the input side of the lever, the center of the spindle and bottom bracket is the fulcrum, and the teeth on the chainring that the chain is on represent the end of the output side. Crankarms come in different lengths, but this has less to do with manipulating leverage than adjusting for differences in rider physiology. Instead, leverage manipulation is achieved by changing the diameter of the chainring. Now, a chainring’s size isn’t referenced by the diameter of the ring. It’s referenced by the amount of teeth at the circumference of the ring. Bicycle chain links come in increments of one-half inch per tooth, and the teeth on the chainring must be spaced so that each roller on the chain fits between two teeth. So, when referencing a chainring’s size, the unit of measurement is its tooth count. But let’s go back to the diameter of the ring for a moment. Since the center of the chainring is on the same axis as the center of the bottom bracket, which we’ve already equated to the fulcrum in our lever system, it’s actually half the diameter, or the radius of the chainring, that determines how much leverage the rider has to pull the chain with during pedaling. Altogether, this means that the smaller the chainring, the more leverage the rider has to pull the chain with. Which is why it’s easier to pedal with a smaller ring. However, to pull the chain a certain amount, the smaller ring will require more pedal movement. This creates the first component in the overall gear ratio of the bike. We’ll look at the other components, and tie it all together, in later videos. Another aspect related to leverage and the crankset is the angle at which the pedaling force is applied to the crankarms. One principle of leverage is that force amplification is at its greatest when the force is applied perpendicular to the lever. When pedaling, our bodies can change how we apply force to the pedal so that we can achieve some level of perpendicularity at multiple points during the pedal stroke. However, studies show that there are certain points in the crank’s rotation where the majority of riders are able to achieve peak force input. This can be mapped out using what’s called the Power Peanut. Named so because of its shape, the Power Peanut illustrates that riders tend to produce the greatest and most efficient transfer of energy into the crankarms when the crankarms are nearly parallel to the ground. This also takes advantage of the fact that gravity pulls down on the rider nearly perpendicular to the crankarms at this position. Conversely, when the crankarms are vertical, energy is applied through the crankarms rather than to them. Stiffness of the crankset is another factor in power transfer. Crankarms, bottom brackets, and even frame flex can momentarily rob the system of efficiency during each pedal stroke. Chainring flex is also a factor, but chainring flex is more of a concern when looking at shift quality. More on that later. By manipulating different materials such as aluminum and carbon fiber in different ways, crankarm stiffness can be managed along with weight, strength, and cost. The issue of stiffness in the bottom bracket can be addressed a number of ways. One example uses a larger diameter aluminum spindle and bearings housed within the frame. Larger diameter tubes can be stiffer without paying a significant weight penalty, or lighter without being significantly more flexible, than smaller diameter tubes of the same material. Another type uses a smaller diameter steel spindle with the bearings placed outside the frame. Externally located bearings displace load over a longer axis and can allow for larger bearings, since the bearings aren’t confined to a small space between the spindle and the frame. Both of which can reduce bearing pressure and wear. More recently, a system has been developed that uses a single crankarm and spindle type, optimized for weight, stiffness, and strength, that is compatible with multiple bearing and frame types. All of these designs combined create a broad number of options for an equally broad number of frame specifications. Each option also offers benefits for fitment that designers consider in addition to stiffness and weight. Chainrings are among the most sophisticated of all drivetrain parts. At a glance, you might miss this. But within the details are design features based on stiffness, strength, weight, wear, upshift quality, downshift quality, both at different points in pedal rotation, chain retention, chain release, and mud shedding. Let’s get the easy stuff out of the way first. Stiffness, strength, and weight are determined by materials and the shape of those materials. Wear is determined by the hardness of the material and the hardness of the coating on the material, like anodization. The rest gets a little more complicated. Let’s start with chainrings designed for use with multiple-chainring drivetrains. Front shifting is initiated by the front derailleur. The design of both the chainring and the front derailleur determines when and how well the shift is executed. Let’s look at some of the features of chainrings that determine front shift quality. During front shifting, the derailleur cage pushes on the chain at a point where load is being transferred from the chainring to the chain. This can create a significant amount of tension on the chain, even at low to moderate pedaling forces. So, the derailleur’s spring rate or servo force needs to be fairly high to overcome this tension and the friction it creates between the chain and chainring. When executing an upshift, shift rivets on the receiving ring grab the outer link of the chain. Upshift clearance cuts create space for the chain to begin to climb onto the teeth of the large chainring. Chamfered teeth minimize the chain angle as it seats onto the chainring. This reduces chain stress and helps to prevent overshifting. Additionally, having the right amount of tension on the chain ensures that it’s able to engage these features with a good amount of force, but still be flexible enough to change angle and maneuver outboard. This is where the power peanut comes in. It can map out where on the chainring these features should be located to take advantage of the ideal power input, and subsequent chain tension potential, of each location around the ring. Upshifts are best achieved when torque is low to moderate. Also, since chains have inner and outer links, the correct link may not always engage the shift feature when it needs to. So other shift features are located on the chainring at points that will interact with the proper link with the appropriate amount of tension. Many of these concepts are also true for downshifting. The shape and the location of the shift features might be different. But using the power peanut to map out the locations and providing enough shift opportunities to ensure that the proper link can be in the right place at the right time still apply. Downshift slots on the larger chainring create space for the chain to transfer toward the smaller chainring. Downshift ramps direct the chain toward the smaller chainring at a specific set of angles. The contoured inner surface guides the chain onto the smaller chainring in a smooth, gradual manner. Chamfered teeth minimize the chain angle as it begins to angle toward the smaller chainring. This reduces chain stress and creates a smooth path for the chain to exit the chainring. Almost every tooth has a chamfer on at least one side so that downshifts may occur everywhere on the chainring. But teeth with more pronounced chamfers on both sides are paired with slots and ramps and located at ideal timing locations. This allows for the smoothest engagement between the chain and smaller chainring. Downshifts are best achieved when torque is low. This ensures that the chain load is lower than the front derailleur spring force so that the derailleur can move the chain inward. This highlights a major drawback to triple chainring systems. Middle chainrings are required to send and receive the chain from or to the large and small chainrings. This requires four distinct sets of shift features at ideal timing locations. Couple this with the reality that many riders tend to spend most of the time riding in the middle ring, and you have a chainring that is very sophisticated, missing a lot of material, and wearing at a faster rate than the others. This is why triple-chainring systems are on the decline on most high-end bicycles. But regardless whether it’s a double or triple chainring system, proper timing of the chainrings with respect to each other and the crankarm is extremely important to shift quality. If the downshift features of the larger ring don’t align with the proper teeth on the smaller chainring, the shift will suffer significantly. The same is true for the upshift. And if the rings aren’t timed properly with the crankarm, the shift features won’t be timed properly with pedaling forces. For dedicated single chainring, or one-by systems, things get simpler. Without the need for a front derailleur and multiple chainrings, one-by systems are lighter than their multiple chainring counterparts. And since one-by chainrings don’t need to be designed around shift features, they can be designed around something else very important, chain retention. One significant drawback to multiple chainring systems is that forceful, sometimes violent movement of the chain around very precise shift features can result in the chain coming off the chainring. This has the obvious consequence of rendering pedal forces moot. Also, if this happens on the outboard side, it can damage the crankarm. If it happens on the inboard side, it can damage the frame. Chains can also be ejected from chainrings by bump forces. When a rider is coasting, spring force from the rear derailleur is the only thing creating tension on the chain. In most cases, this tension is high enough to keep the chain secured to the bike. But if the terrain gets rough and bump forces are high, chain slap can get severe enough to overcome the derailleur spring force and eject the chain from the chainring. One-by chainrings can be designed to fight this. By making each tooth wide enough to contact the insides of both the inner and outer link plates, friction can hold the chain to the teeth. Wide teeth also keep the chain better aligned to the chainring so that the next tooth that engages the chain is centered on the link. Also, one-by chainrings can have teeth with more squared tips. This creates more radial engagement with the chain, adding to retention capability. Finally, some one-by chainring teeth are designed to allow the chain to easily push mud and other contaminants off the tooth for better engagement, retention, and smoother operation. Now that we’ve discussed cranks and chainrings, let’s discuss how they go together to form the overall crankset. There are two common ways to attach chainrings to cranks. One uses a bolt and nut system to attach the chainring to a spider, which may be integrated with the crankarm, or bolted onto it. Depending on the size of the chainrings, this can produce a number of different bolt circle diameters. While it is possible to design every chainring around one small bolt circle diameter, it's not ideal as this will result in significant flex with larger chainrings. A flexible chainring won’t shift as well as a stiff chainring since force from the derailleur and chain will momentarily flex the ring instead of forcing the chain against it to interact with the shift features. So multiple bolt circle diameters allow multiple sizes of chainrings to have greater support for stiffness, without having to design thicker rings, which would add weight. Single chainrings can add material for stiffness, without having to work around shift features or other chainrings.One-by systems also have the option of mounting chainrings directly to the crankarm. The benefits to a direct mount chainring are simplicity and weight savings, since a spider and multiple mounting bolts aren’t involved. From the chainring, we move to the crank spindle. Older designs incorporate the spindle into the bottom bracket, with either a square taper or splined section on each side that fastens to the crankarms with a bolt. Newer designs integrate the spindle into one of the crankarms and has a splined section that fastens to the other crankarm with a bolt. Spindles are most commonly made from steel or aluminum, depending on weight, stiffness, strength, and cost considerations. Spindles can also have different lengths to accommodate different frame and bottom bracket widths. Cranks arms can be made at varying lengths to accommodate riders with different physiologies. Typically, these lengths fall within a range from 165 to 175 millimeters, with a few outliers. Also, the distance between the riders’ feet, known as the Q Factor, is an important aspect of rider physiology affected by the crankset, as well as the pedals, foot placement on the pedals, and the frame itself. For many riders, a narrow Q Factor is desirable, but may not always be possible as the crank arms need to clear the frame’s chainstays. Crankarms can be made from a variety of materials. The material and how that material is formed depends on the desired balance between stiffness, strength, weight, and cost. For example, solid aluminum arms might be heavier to achieve certain stiffness and strength requirements, but require less steps to manufacture, which keeps cost down. Hollow aluminum arms strike a good balance between weight and stiffness but, are more expensive to produce. Carbon fiber frees up the designer to place emphasis on stiffness and strength without paying a significant weight penalty, but its more time consuming and costly to work with. In our next video, we’ll take a look at how chains are constructed and how they work within the drivetrain.