A chain in a multi-speed drive system must be designed to not only be able to move smoothly across different gears, but must also be resistant to wear, contamination, and corrosion. And every link must be strong enough to withstand tremendous amounts of load applied at multiple angles. After all, a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. Really?! Each set of links is comprised of two steel outer link plates, two steel inner link plates, two steel rollers, and a steel pin. Outer link plates are where most of the creative design of a chain happens. Outer link plates can be chamfered, and in some cases bulged to allow them to more easily move across, over, onto, or off chainrings and cogs. They can also have sections removed from them to reduce weight without significantly affecting strength. And they can be coated with specific materials for reduced friction against other parts, corrosion resistance, and aesthetics. Inner link plates are similar to outer links, but with an added feature to retain a roller between the links. The roller is literally that, the part of the chain that rolls onto and off chainrings and cogs. The radius of the roller and the distance between each roller is what determines the base dimensions of chainring and cog teeth. The distance between the centers of each roller is one half inch. The final link in this chain is the pin. Sticking with the link jokes, huh? No, they’re funny, they’re funny. This is my laughing face. The pin is what holds each of these components together, and it can be fitted in a number of ways that have significant effect on the strength the chain. When chains are constructed, a machine compresses against the ends of the pins to form a mushroom-shaped end cap to capture the plates and the roller. This process is called riveting. If the machine makes a single pass, the outer one third of each pin is pushed outward to form the cap. This is indicated by two parallel steps on the pin. If the machine makes two passes, the first in one direction and the second offset by ninety degrees, more endcap coverage is achieved. Double pass pins are identifiable by a square-shaped step on the pin. Circumferential riveting compresses the entirety of the end of the pin to create 360 degrees of overlap. Each technique produces a different pin push out strength. This is the measurement of force required to push the pin through the outer link plate, which directly correlates to the amount of force required to pull the outer link over the pin during chain failure at the pin connection. A single step rivet has the lowest pin push out strength, double riveted, or cross stepped pins have a higher pin push out strength, and circumferential riveting offers the highest pin push out strength of the three methods. Flush riveting is another method of creating overlap, where the outer link plate has a step pressed into it that allows the endcap of the pin to sit flush with the outer surface of the outer link plate. This allows the chain to have a narrower profile without having to make plates and rollers thinner. Finally, pins can also be hollow to reduce weight without affecting durability. In each of these cases, the complexity of the process dictates the cost of the chain. A hollow plate, hollow pin, flush rivet chain with the most advanced coatings will carry the highest cost, but it’ll provide the lightest, strongest, most durable, quietest, and best shifting chain available. Chains must have enough lateral stiffness to allow them to positively engage with shift features on chainrings and cogs, but still be flexible enough to work at different angles without producing excessive friction or binding. This is achieved by carefully managing dimensions and tolerances between all of the parts of the chain. When considering chain life and maintenance, it’s important to understand some basic concepts. When chains are produced, they are assembled with a lubricant and corrosion inhibitor that is applied to all of the mating surfaces and outer surfaces. This provides extremely high-quality lubrication, but also leaves a coating that can hold on to contaminants. So, when installing a new chain, it’s best to use a non-acidic or alkaline cleaner to clean the outer surfaces of the chain. But leave the internal lubricant where it is. Eventually, it will work itself out and new lubricant will need to be applied. When applying the new lubricant, the same logic of getting the lube between all the moving parts, and removing it from the outer surfaces applies. As chains wear, the distance between pins will increase. This is often mistaken as the plates stretching as the result of high tension on the chain. In reality, the change in dimension is the result of constant tension combined with friction enlarging the pin holes in the plates and wearing down the pins. Proper lubrication will help reduce this wear, but eventually the chain dimensions will change enough to produce poor interaction with chainrings and cogs, usually signaled by poor shifting or chain slippage under high torque. A number of tools exist to help determine if this dimension change is severe enough to warrant chain replacement. If this type of wear is ignored long enough, it can cause a similar situation with the cassette and chainrings, where the tooth dimensions also change as they follow the chain’s wear pattern. When this happens, a new chain will no longer fit the tooth profiles, and symptoms will continue to occur. This will require replacement of the chain, the chainrings, and the cassette. This is why proper chain lubrication and periodic chain inspection is very important to the health of the entire drivetrain. When assembling a chain onto a bike, the ends of the chain need to be connected in a manner that doesn’t affect shifting performance or reduce chain durability. Some chains can be connected using a pin specifically designed to couple outer links to inner links and the roller. One end of the pin is capped while the other is only slightly enlarged so that it can go through the plate without enlarging the hole in the plate. The result is a lower pin push out strength on the connecting link than the rest of the links, which makes the connecting link the weakest link. Another method of connecting the chain uses a set of outer links with pre-installed pins. Each master link is keyed in a way that allows the pin on the opposing master link to be inserted through an enlarged hole in the link, then pulled past a set of steps and into a smaller hole. This allows the master link to be disassembled and reassembled multiple times. Narrower chains require the heads of the pins to push through the steps on the opposing plates. Elasticity of the metal allows the steps to retain a sufficient amount of resistance to the pins pushing back through them without the aid of a tool. Since forces applied to the chain in this direction are low, this allows the master link to be as strong or stronger than the rest of the links in the chain, even during high torque and sideload scenarios. That said, this type of master link should not be removed and reinstalled, since the steps will eventually deform to the point where they can’t sufficiently hold the pin in place. In our next video, we’ll look at cassettes.