When the rider applies force to the pedals, the chainring pulls on the chain. The chain then pulls on the cassette, which is fastened to a freehub mechanism that is attached to the wheel. The pull on the cassette and freehub turns the wheel to propel the bicycle and the rider. We’ve already used a simple lever model to discuss how moving the chain across chainrings changes the gear ratios, giving the rider more or less mechanical advantage to help with pedaling. For the cassette, this concept also applies, but in reverse. The cassette acts as one side of a lever, with chain pull acting as the input force on that side. The contact patch of the tire acts as the other end of the lever with the bike and rider’s mass serving as the object being lifted. Of course, since this mass is being pulled toward the center of the Earth by gravity, the slope of the terrain serves as an important variable when considering pedaling forces. By placing the chain on a larger cog, the mechanical advantage is increased so that the mass is easier to move but requires more movement to do so. The movement in this case is the amount of pedal rotation. The opposite is true if the chain is placed on a smaller cog. Less pedal rotation produces more wheel rotation but requires more pedaling force. And just like chainrings, cassette cog diameters are designated by tooth count. Only in this case, less teeth equals a higher gear and vise-versa. Which can be confusing. (Onscreen text) “It always does it in the highest gear” “The HIGHEST gear?” “Yeah, the highest gear, up here.” “THIS highest gear?” “No, no, no, no. The highest gear.” The confusion around how to talk about different gearing is actually pretty common. This is probably because there are two ways you can look at it. One is from the rider’s perspective, where the rider is actually riding and focused on what’s ahead of them, not necessarily what the bike is doing. If they push a button or move a lever, the bike will respond in a certain fashion. Either getting harder to pedal, but covering more ground per pedal stroke, or getting easier to pedal and covering less ground per pedal stroke. From the rider’s perspective, shifting to a harder gear would be an upshift to a higher gear, and shifting to an easier gear would be a downshift to a lower gear. And this applies to both the front and the rear shifting. Shifters with gear indicators will agree with this. The other perspective is the mechanic’s perspective. This is where the rider or mechanic are looking at the drivetrain while shifting. And this is where it can get a little less than intuitive. Typically, when looking at the drivetrain, people tend to look at it from above. Doing so can create a mental connection between the shift and how the chain is moving in space, or relative to the ground. Front shifting is still pretty intuitive. An upshift to a higher gear moves the chain up onto the larger chainring. But rear shifting is the opposite. When viewed from above, upshifting to a higher gear moves the chain downward. This is the confusing part, but it doesn’t have to be if we shift our perspective. If we think about where the shift occurs, at the derailleur, the two perspectives suddenly align much better. Front shifting occurs at the top of the chainrings. The front derailleur moves the chain downward toward a lower gear, or upward toward a higher gear. Rear shifting occurs at the bottom of the cassette. And if you view chain movement from this perspective, a downshift to a lower gear will actually move the chain downward, and an upshift to a higher gear will move the chain upward. This also aligns with inboard and outboard terminology, where inboard shifting always makes pedaling easier, and outboard shifting always makes pedaling harder. So, whichever language you or others around you use, looking at shifting from the perspective of where the shift actually occurs might help to simplify the conversation. The ideal gear ratio is one that allows the rider to exert a comfortable amount of power at a comfortable rate of rotation to accelerate or to maintain speed as desired. It may be easy to pedal down a hill in a low gear, but in order to accelerate, you’d have to pedal at an rpm that is too fast to maintain for very long, and could even cause you to lose control of the bike. Conversely, climbing in a high gear might allow you to cover a lot of distance quickly, but you will quickly tire out. Multiple chainring systems allow you to switch gear ratios in large increments by shifting from one chainring to another. Cassettes allow for smaller changes in gear ratio. Overall gear range is determined by the difference in gear ratios from when the chain is on the smallest chainring and the largest cog, known as the granny gear, to when the chain is on the largest chainring and the smallest cog. Bikes with multiple chainrings can have broader gear ranges, assuming the gear ranges of the cassettes are the same. For this reason, range isn’t as much of an issue at the cassette, so more incremental cog differences can be used to allow the rider to be more precise with gear selection. However, double and single chainring systems offer significant advantages over triple chainrings. So much so that riders have embraced the exchange of small gear increments at the cassette for fewer chainrings with the same overall gear ranges. The result is a number of systems employing expanded gear range cassettes. Of course, adding more cogs can allow for more incremental changes in gearing. But more gears added to a system require more space, which is limited by the frame and shared by the wheel. And components can only get so thin. A solution to this is the dishing of the cassette to follow the angle of the spokes. For consistency in gear changes, it’s important to know that tooth count determines a gear ratio, but it’s gear percentage that determines the steps in gearing. For example, if we have an 18- tooth cog, and we wanted the next gear to be 16 percent lower, the nearest whole number to 16 percent of 18 is 3, so we would add 3 more teeth to the next cog, giving us a 21-tooth cog to get 16 percent gear change. Now, let’s say we have a 36-tooth cog, and we want to get the same gear change, 16 percent, from that cog to the next gear. The nearest whole number that is 16 percent of 36 is 6. So, we would add 6 teeth to 36 for the next cog, which would be 42 teeth. This change in tooth count between the larger cogs may seem like a lot, especially compared to that of the smaller cogs, but the actual change in gearing between the two is consistent. There are a number of ways a cassette can be constructed. Individual cogs and spacers can be stacked onto a keyed driver. Or they can also be connected to each other with pins. While simple and cost effective, this method can present some challenges. If the cogs aren’t pinned together, or the pins are placed near the center of the cassette, the cogs may flex slightly as chain load is applied to them. This can delay a shift. Not by a lot, but moreso than with a more robust construction method. Individual cogs that are assembled together are susceptible to small variations in timing. Again, it’s not much, but it can be a factor. Especially with loose cogs and a worn driver body. Another method uses rivets to attach a number of the cogs to an aluminum or composite spider. This can add cost, but it can also improve stiffness and weight. The most sophisticated method is to machine the cassette as a single piece. Single piece cassettes are cone-shaped. Unlike of a stack of flexible plates or plates pinned to a spider, the conical shape provides significantly more rigidity with less material. The result is higher and more consistent shift quality at a lower weight. Single-piece cassettes take significant machining time to produce, which makes them more expensive than other cassette types. A lower cost alternative is to use pins and cog rings. This is similar to a cassette made from pinned plates. But by removing material from the center of each cog and placing the pins close to the edges of each cog, the cassette can be very light and stiff. As I mentioned before, timing of the cogs to each other is important as the shift features are similar to those on chainrings. Inboard and outboard shift features are placed in a number of positions around the cassette. Unlike chainrings, shifting on the cassette isn’t specifically timed to the crankarm positions since the cassette is on a freehub and can be in any position at any time. However, rear shifting is a lot less sensitive to pedaling forces than front shifting since the shift occurs at the lowest section of the cassette where chain derailment is more isolated from pedaling load. Also, when the chain moves across the cassette, it moves from one cog to a slightly smaller or larger cog, instead of moving to a significantly smaller or larger chainring. So, a good rear shift can be achieved across a broader range of pedaling forces. Cassettes can be mounted to wheels a number of ways. Modern drivetrains incorporate a ratcheting system built into a freehub which is fastened to the wheel with a bolt or the wheel’s axle assembly. Standard freehubs are keyed in a way that only allow the cassette and cogs to be installed with proper timing. The cassette is secured to the freehub with a threaded lockring. XD and XDR driver bodies are also keyed, but not in any specific way since XD and XDR compatible cassettes are assembled as a single part with no need for attention to timing of the cogs. The keys provide a platform for the cassette to mount to while a sleeve inside the cassette threads onto the driver body. The design of the ratcheting mechanism in freehubs can vary depending on manufacturer or model, but usually incorporates a number of sprung pawls on the driver body interacting with teeth built into the hub that allows for free rotation of the freehub in one direction while engaging and applying force to the hub in the other. Some designs exchange individual pawls for rings with ramped teeth and springs or magnets to create one-way engagement. In our next video, we’ll look at front derailleurs.