The purpose of a derailleur is to move the chain from one gear to another. In the case of front shifting, the derailleur works with shift features on the chainrings to make this happen. Front derailleurs operate in a fairly simple way, where the derailleur mounts to the bike, has a linkage connecting the mount to a cage, a spring in the linkage to create tension to work with shifter input, and a number of adjustments to set the derailleur up to the system properly. Starting with how front derailleurs mount to the bike, there are multiple mounting options available depending on the needs of the frame. The most common method is a bolted clamp that goes around the seat tube. The clamp can be positioned high, low, or somewhere in-between relative to the derailleur to work with varying amounts of seat tube space. This method of mounting provides adjustments for height and cage angle relative to the chainrings. Derailleurs can also mount to a braze-on fitting. This gets its name from metal frames that have this part welded on to the seat tube, but carbon frames utilize rivets and epoxy to accomplish this. This fitting also allows for height and angle adjustment. Another mounting type uses one or two bolts to mount the derailleur directly to the seat tube from the side. This method only allows for height adjustment. Once the derailleur is mounted to the bike, the adjustments are used to set the derailleur cage to the proper angle and distance from the chainrings. Cages are designed to move the chain inboard and outboard. They have features that assist with this movement while not allowing the cage to get in its own way when the features aren’t being used. Since movement across the cassette will pitch the chain at varying angles, the front derailleur cage must be wide enough to stay clear of the chain at all of these angles, but still be able to move the chain when the front shift occurs. The cage is connected to a parallelogram linkage that clamps to the shift cable. The shift cable runs through the shift housing to the shifter. When the shifter is actuated for a higher gear, the cable pulls the linkage from its resting, or normal position, to swing the cage outboard. The spring in the linkage is stretched until the shifter completes the shift and ratchets to hold the position of the derailleur. When the shifter is actuated for a lower gear, the ratchet mechanism in the shifter is released, and the spring in the derailleur linkage pulls the cage and the cable inboard to their normal positions. Electronic systems forgo the cable and use a servo attached to the linkage that communicates electronically with the shifter to move the derailleur to specific positions pre-determined by the system’s programming. Adjustments for the derailleur include the cage angle, which is adjusted by rotating the entire derailleur on its mount if possible, cage height, which is adjusted by raising or lowering the derailleur on its mount, limits, which determine how far inboard and outboard the derailleur is able to swing, and indexing, which is adjusted with cable tension or the system’s programming in the case of electronic shifting. For front derailleurs, indexing is primarily used for adjusting the cage for chain clearance. Derailleur height is adjusted so that the features of the cage that execute the shift are placed at the correct position relative to the chain. Adjusting the angle of the derailleur properly ensures that the cage’s shift features contact the chain at the right time and that the other, non-shift-oriented areas of the cage stay clear of the chain. Some designs incorporate a wedge-shaped block between the derailleur and the frame to provide rotational support to the derailleur. Limit screws ensure that the derailleur can swing far enough to execute shifts, but not so far that the chain overshifts. Overshifting can cause significant damage to the bike, so limit adjustments are extremely important to get right. Some front derailleurs use a chain spotter to keep the chain from dropping onto the frame. This can be adjusted to keep the chain from coming off the chainring without the chain rubbing against it during normal operation. Historically, there has been some acceptance that when the chain is on the furthest outboard or inboard cogs of the cassette, chain rub on the front derailleur cage is unavoidable. This is amplified on frames with shorter chainstays, as this exaggerates the angle of the chain in these positions. One solution to this problem is front derailleur trim, where the front shifter has a micro-index position built into the ratchet mechanism that allows the rider to move the derailleur a small amount to keep it clear of the chain in these positions. Electronic systems can incorporate a similar feature by programming the front derailleur to make automatic adjustments for clearance after the shift has completed. Another solution to this problem is use of a front derailleur linkage that pitches the angle of the cage as it moves outboard. With this design, the cage stays more parallel with the chain when the chain is at its most extreme angles to achieve clearance in all gear combinations. Some final notes on front derailleurs; the stiffness of the front derailleur is very important in executing a quality shift, especially under high pedaling forces. A robust linkage, frame mount, and frame are key here. Some front derailleurs are designed to work with specific chainring sizes in order to properly align shift features and open sections of the cage with the position of the chain on the chainrings. Different frame designers route shift cables to the front derailleur in different ways. So, some derailleurs are designed to work with cable pulling from a number of directions. And in some cases, multiple directions. In our next video, we’ll look at rear derailleurs.