Despite having the simple task of moving the chain across the cassette, the rear derailleur is a complex mechanism with many design variations and compatibility considerations. The best place to start is to look at all the parts of the rear derailleur. We begin with where the derailleur mounts to the frame, the b-knuckle. B stands for bolt, and this is the part that bolts to the frame. B-knuckles can be designed to be partially fixed in relation to the frame, or they can rotate on the frame with spring tension. From the b-knuckle, we move to the parallelogram. Similar to the linkage on a front derailleur, this is the part that the cable clamps to and produces inboard and outboard movement of the derailleur. It also has a spring inside of it. The parallelogram attaches to the p-knuckle. P stands for pivot, and the cage pivots around this part. The cage on a rear derailleur is significantly different than on the front derailleur. Instead of using the inner and outer plates to push the chain across the gear range, an upper guide pulley guides the chain. The jockey pulley is part of an overall system, along with the cage and the upper guide pulley, that gives excess chain in the system a place to go to remain under tension. More on that later. The b-knuckle bolts the derailleur to the frame’s derailleur hanger. For cable actuated derailleurs, it’s also the part of the derailleur that the cable housing engages with. When shifting, the shifter pulls on or releases cable that runs through the housing and clamps onto the derailleur’s parallelogram linkage. The cable can run directly from the b-knuckle to the clamp bolt, around a lever fin, or around a pulley and lever fin on the b-knuckle to the bolt. When the cable is pulled by the shifter, the cable pulls the clamp bolt toward the b-knuckle, which extends the parallelogram and stretches the parallelogram spring. An index point in the ratchet mechanism of the shifter holds the derailleur in this position until it is released, and the parallelogram spring pulls the derailleur toward its resting, or normal position. As the parallelogram swings the cage inboard, it moves the chain to a larger cog. This is where things get interesting. And complicated. Rear derailleurs move across the cassette at what is referred to as an attack angle. Many derailleurs have an attack angle that mimics the conical profile of the cassette they are paired with. Others have a more shallow attack angle. And some have a perfectly horizontal attack angle. This is the point where you ask “Why?” and I respond by saying “Patience”. Before we look at the purpose of different attack angles, we need to understand how the cage and upper guide pulley behave during shifting. To do that, we need to go back to the beginning for a moment. Consider a single-speed drivetrain. We have the chainring, the cog, and a chain between them. The size of the chainring and the cog, and the distance between the two determines the length of the chain. Now let’s add a smaller gear. If we use any other gear combination besides large and large, we end up with chain slack. And chain slack leads to all sorts of problems. The chain flops around, bangs into things, falls off. So, there needs to be some way to absorb chain slack when we’re in any gear combination besides big/big. This is where the rear derailleur’s cage comes in. The cage rotates on the p-knuckle and has spring tension applied to it. As the chain tension decreases by shifting to a smaller gear combination, the spring pulls the cage back and applies tension to the chain. As the chain tension increases by shifting to a larger gear combination, the chain tension overcomes the spring tension, and the cage rotates forward. The amount of chain slack that the cage is able to compensate for is referred to as the cage’s capacity, which is referenced by the number of individual links, or teeth being compensated for. (Onscreen text) * Some long cage derailleurs, despite having enough capacity, aren’t compatible with smaller range cassettes due to different attack angles. To determine if a cage has the appropriate length for the capacity of the system, a little bit of simple math is in order. Let’s say you have a bike with a crankset that has 53 teeth on the large ring, and 39 on the smaller ring. And the cassette has 25 teeth on the largest cog, and 11 on the smallest. If we do a little bit of math, we get a difference of 14 teeth between the smallest and largest chainring. If we do the same math on the rear, we also get 14 teeth difference between the ends of the range of the cassette. Now, it doesn’t matter how many chainrings or cogs you have on the cassette. We’re only looking at the ends of the range. 14 and 14 represent the capacity of both the crankset and the cassette. If we add the two together, we get 28. That’s the capacity of the total drivetrain. The rear derailleur cage needs to be long enough to absorb 28 teeth worth of chain in order to be able to use the same chain on big/big and small/small without having chain slack when you’re in small/small. Pretty easy, right? So, what happens if we change the numbers? Let’s keep the same crankset, which was a 53/39, and a capacity of 14. But we’ll change the cassette to a 32/11, giving us a capacity of 21, which is 7 more teeth than we had on the last cassette. If the derailleur cage is able to absorb 28, and we now add 7 more, the cage is no longer long enough. We need a rear derailleur with a longer cage. Otherwise, the slack won’t be completely absorbed, and we’ll end up with chain droop. This is why multiple cage lengths exist, and why they need to be paired with the proper capacity drivetrain. Short cage derailleurs are light and far away from the ground, which is nice. But that doesn’t always make them the right choice. Some cages feature a clutch mechanism to control chain slap. Located in the p-knuckle and attached to the cage, the clutch uses friction to control energy from the cage spring, requiring more force for the cage to swing. More sophisticated derailleurs can use a hydraulic damper to control cage movement. By using fluid and directional valving, a damper can provide resistance to forward cage movement produced by bump forces and allow the cage to quickly spring back to tension the chain again. A damper can also be speed sensitive, so that quick movements produced by bump forces meet greater resistance than slower movements produced by normal shifting. This added force is mostly imperceptible to the rider when shifting, but it provides enough stability to the derailleur to keep the chain under tension and prevent it from damaging components or falling off the derailleur pulleys and chainrings. Now that we’ve looked at how the cage works, let’s look at the upper guide pulley. The upper guide pulley guides the chain across the cassette. It can be attached to the cage concentric with the pivot, or offset. If the pulley is concentric, cage movement has no effect on pulley position. But if the pulley is offset, it will orbit around the pivot as the cage swings. Here is where things get even more interesting. In order for the upper guide pulley to do its job, it needs to be far enough away from the cassette that it can move freely inboard and outboard without binding against the cogs. But it also has to be close enough to the cassette so that chain flex isn’t exaggerated by a long section of chain between the pulley and the cassette, which produces slow, sloppy shifting. So, a specific chain gap, also known as b-gap, must be set using the b-adjust screw. Once this gap is set, the derailleur has to maintain the gap as it moves across the cassette. How does it do this? One of two ways. The attack angle of the parallelogram linkage can match the profile of the cassette. This is a simple solution, but it works optimally with one cassette profile, and less so with others. Meaning, if you use a cassette that doesn’t match the attack angle perfectly, shifting may be less than precise at one end of the cassette range. The other solution is to use a shallower attack angle with an offset upper guide pulley. As the derailleur moves inboard and the chain wraps around larger cogs, the cage swings forward. By placing the upper guide pulley at a specific point on the cage, offset from the cage pivot, the pulley will drop as the cage swings forward, enlarging the gap between the pulley and the cog. The benefit of this method is that the amount that the pulley drops during each shift is proportional to the size of the cog that its shifting to. Meaning, the chain gap will remain perfectly consistent across the cassette. Dedicated one by systems can use a horizontal attack angle and a pulley with significant offset to achieve this. What’s the added benefit here? Most bump forces are applied vertically. With a diagonal swing derailleur, vertical bump forces can also produce inward movement. And if you are pedaling when this happens, you get an unwanted shift, known as a ghost shift. The parallelogram spring is able to provide tension to the derailleur to control this if the bump forces are moderate. More severe bump forces would require a stiffer spring, which would require more force at the shifter. A horizontal swing linkage isn’t influenced by vertical bump forces. So, ghost shifting doesn’t happen, regardless of the severity of the vertical bump forces. One major limitation to an offset upper guide pulley is that multiple chainring systems will change chain tension as the chain moves from one chainring to the other. This moves the rear derailleur cage and upper guide pulley even though the rear derailleur isn’t being shifted. So multiple chainring systems need to be paired with a rear derailleur that has very little or no pulley offset. Or they can be paired with a rear derailleur that is able to rotate around a sprung b-knuckle, which will allow the entire derailleur to rotate forward and up as the cage swings forward, compensating for downward pulley movement during front shifting. The drawback to such a system is that the spring tensions at the b-knuckle and p-knuckle must be perfectly balanced for the derailleur to swing the appropriate amount to manage the chain gap. Plus, allowing the entire derailleur to move that freely on the frame allows for excessive chain slap and contact between the p-knuckle and the bike frame. Imagine a carbon chainstay constantly being impacted by an aluminum derailleur. Not good. With derailleur pulleys, friction is a point worth mentioning. Friction in a system robs energy as it gets transmitted to the rear wheel. This could be friction in the pedals, bottom bracket, or hubs. It can also be friction in the derailleur pulleys and the chain. For the pulleys, high quality bearings can reduce friction. This can help to offset friction from the bearing seals on the pulleys. For the chain, larger diameter derailleur pulleys can minimize the amount that the chain’s outer and inner links overlap on each other, effectively reducing friction. Larger pulleys can also increase the amount of capacity in the cage by wrapping the chain around a larger radius instead of making the cage longer. These are small details, but they can add up, just like every gram. Moving away from how derailleurs and chains interact, let’s look at how shifters and derailleurs communicate. When actuating a cable shifter, all you are doing is moving cable back and forth a certain amount. This amount determines how much the derailleur moves. But within each shift system is a means of using leverage to manipulate that relationship. It’s called an actuation ratio. Actuation ratios are determined by the point where the cable housing anchors to the b-knuckle, where the cable clamps to the parallelogram, and how those parts move in relation to one another. A very basic example of how this works is if the shifter is moving cable through the system by 1 millimeter. This gets transmitted to the rear derailleur and through the linkage to produce 2 millimeters of horizontal derailleur movement across the cassette. This would be a 2:1 actuation ratio. The importance of actuation ratios has to do with maintaining shift integrity when the system gets contaminated. The example of the 2:1 actuation ratio creates a system that requires a little cable movement to get more derailleur movement. Which is fine until you consider that, through leverage and force amplification, this makes the parallelogram spring feel twice as firm to actuate against when shifting. So, you could use a lighter parallelogram spring. Which is fine, until contamination gets into the cable housing and creates excessive friction for the cable to have to move against. Pulling cable through the housing with the shifter might not be that big a deal since our hands are probably strong enough to overcome the added friction. But the parallelogram spring is the only thing pulling the cable back through the housing. And if a lighter spring is used, it may not be strong enough to pull the cable the correct amount to execute the shift accurately. A lower actuation ratio would allow for a stronger spring to work through the contamination without requiring high force at the shifter, but would require more lever movement at the shifter or a shifter with a larger diameter spool. Also, some actuation ratios change as the derailleur moves across the cassette. For example, a shift system that has a 1:1 ratio might have a true one-to-one relationship between cable movement and derailleur movement at one end of the range, but then graduate to a different ratio by the time the derailleur gets to the other end of the range. If all of the components in the system are designed and constructed properly, this isn’t much of an issue. However, if a frame falls outside of the recommended dimension specs and the derailleur is placed too close or too far away from the cassette, limit and indexing adjustments can ensure that the derailleur starts and ends its movement across the cassette at the right places. But as the derailleur moves through the range, the amount of cable movement needed at the derailleur and the amount delivered by the shifter will deviate from one another, resulting in increasingly poor indexing as the derailleur moves across the cassette. This type of evolving actuation exists on older systems, while newer systems maintain a consistent actuation ratio through the range of derailleur movement. Whether the actuation ratio is lower or higher depends on the needs of both the shifter and the derailleur in terms of lever movement, lever force, and how much contamination the system is expected to encounter. If a shifter is paired with a derailleur that has a different actuation ratio, the correct amount of cable won’t get moved. This will result in a sloppy shift, or no shift. Many of the design characteristics and functionality of analog rear derailleurs exist on their electronic counterparts. Cage lengths, attack angles, and b-gap all do the same thing. All of the setup adjustments are similar, if not exactly the same. What is different is that removing the cable and parallelogram spring from the picture and replacing them with electronic servos eliminates the need to design around actuation ratios, allows for precise indexing on any frame, regardless of how closely it adheres to fit specifications, allows the forces moving the parallelogram to be strong without feeling it at the shifter, and eliminates friction from the shift. There are a number of ways a rear derailleur can be adjusted. Limit screws control how far the derailleur can move inboard and outboard. These adjustments are very important in making sure the derailleur doesn’t pull the chain off the smallest cog onto the frame, or off the largest cog into the wheel. As mentioned earlier, the distance from the upper guide pulley to the cog it’s positioned under is very important to shift performance. If the pulley is too far from the cog, normal chain flex might prevent the chain from moving to the next cog and properly engaging its shift feature. However, if the pulley is too close to the cog, moving away from that cog might be difficult as the chain can’t easily release, and in the case of an inboard shift, the chain can bind against the next cog instead of moving onto it. So, a specific distance is required for optimal shifting, and different derailleur types will have different optimal distances. This distance can be set by turning the b-adjust screw. Once the limits and b-gap have been set, indexing can be adjusted with cable tension. This starts with attaching the cable with an appropriate amount of tension, and can be fine-tuned with a barrel adjuster. Some systems place the barrel adjuster on the derailleur, or on the shifter, or both. Barrel adjusters can also be placed between sections of shifter cable housing. Electronic systems use programming to accurately move the derailleur the necessary amount for proper indexing. Over time, cable tension can decrease as shifter housing components are constantly placed under tension and can further seat against each other and other components. So occasional cable tension adjustments might be needed as shift quality fades over time. And this is key. Over time. Every now and then, you might find that your shift quality suddenly decreases. When this happens, most people’s instinct is to start turning the barrel adjuster. This might improve the situation slightly, but not entirely. You might not be able to shift to the smallest cog. Even worse, you might go for your granny gear and send the chain right into the wheel. So, then you start turning limit screws. This takes care of the small cog and chain drop situation, but the shifting still isn’t what it was. In desperation, you adjust the b-gap. This probably won’t help. So, what’s going on? It is possible for some screws to self-adjust with enough vibration, but it's not likely that this is causing the problem. Well, before you grab a wrench, go to the back of the bike and look to see if the derailleur cage is parallel to the wheel. If you experience what I’ve just described, it probably isn’t. The bottom of the derailleur is probably angled in toward the wheel. If this is the case, you have a bent derailleur hanger. The best designed and set up rear derailleur will not function properly if the derailleur hanger is bent. This is true for any system, regardless if it’s cable or electronically actuated. Let’s run through a little exercise to illustrate the effects of a bent hanger. If the distance between each of the cogs on a cassette is 4 millimeters, the amount of cable movement from the shifter combined with the derailleur’s actuation ratio needs to produce 4 millimeters of horizontal derailleur movement per shift. But when the derailleur hanger is bent, it changes the angle at which the derailleur moves. So, the 4 millimeters of horizontal derailleur movement needed to complete each shift is no longer horizontal. It’s slightly diagonal. 4 millimeters of slightly diagonal movement equates to less than 4 millimeters of horizontal movement. Using simple numbers, if the first shift is off by a tenth of a millimeter, the shift might not suffer significantly, if at all. But each additional shift adds another tenth of a millimeter of deviation, so that after ten shifts, the derailleur is a full millimeter from being centered on the cog. This is 25 percent less movement than needed, which would be enough to cause a very sloppy shift or no shift at all. But it gets worse. In addition to poor index spacing, the chain gap decreases as the derailleur swings inboard. This will also produce sloppy shifting, as well as binding. It’s not likely that the hanger got bent over time. More likely, the derailleur impacted something, maybe a rock on the trail, or maybe the bike fell over, or you backed into it with your car. I’ve had people tell me it’s a brand-new bike or a brand-new frame, the hanger shouldn’t be bent. Well, why not? Whether the bike is old or new, bent hangers are common. So common, in fact, that frame designers will make them easy to bend. Since bent hangers are so common, frame designers often will bolt the hanger to the frame and make it out of relatively soft aluminum. This is so that if something does impact the derailleur, the hanger will hopefully bend before the derailleur or frame suffer any significant damage. Hangers are cheap, frames and derailleurs not so much. So, a hanger that is easy to straighten and inexpensive to replace is a far better option that the alternative. All that said, it’s important to know that you can only bend a piece of metal so far, or so many times before it’s no longer strong enough to do its job properly, or it breaks. So, it’s not a bad idea to have a replacement hanger on-hand at all times. The exercise we just went through illustrates a hanger that was bent inward from an impact. But hangers can also be bent outward or get twisted, so make sure you check the hanger's alignment in all directions. In our next video, we’ll look at shifters.