Communication between the shifter and the derailleur is a very important aspect of shift performance. If the shifter communicates the right message, but that message gets lost in transmission, the derailleur doesn’t do the right thing. With mechanically actuated shifters and derailleurs, the line of communication is the cable. The cable is part of a system that includes the cable housing, end caps, or ferrules, and the frame. Cable moving through housing is subject to friction. If the section of cable and housing is straight, there is friction, but it's minimal. But housing is used to change cable direction, so there will be multiple bends in the system. When the housing bends, the cable is forced against the inside of the housing along the inside of the bend. As the cable moves back and forth, it experiences more friction at these points. New cable and housing are smooth, and in some cases lubricated, so initial friction is low. But as these parts become worn, contaminated, or corroded, friction increases. If the friction is high enough to counter derailleur spring force, it can keep the cable from moving the right amount needed for a shift, which can lead to poor shifting. So periodic cleaning, lubrication, or replacement of cable and housing is needed to keep the shift quality high. When installing new cable, housing, and ferrules, it’s important to make sure that all of these components are assembled and seated completely. Sometimes a ferrule won’t seat in the frame completely, or the housing won’t seat into the ferrule completely. It will appear that everything is fine, and shift quality might be good for a while. But over time, the system is subjected to tension from shifting, and these parts will continue to seat themselves. This effectively shortens the overall housing, which creates slack in the cable. Slack in the cable results in poor shifting. The good news is, barrel adjustment can quickly eliminate the slack and restore shifting performance. However, if the system is properly seated at the time of installation, initial shift quality won’t diminish as much or at all from decreasing cable tension. Steps for proper seating include cutting housing sections squarely with a high-quality, shifter housing-specific cutter, pushing ferrules completely onto the housing and into the frame, shifter, and derailleur, and some minor initial tensioning of the cable. Running full length shifter housing is a way to reduce the number of these contact points, as well as keep the system better sealed against contamination. However, high quality housing is especially important here since more housing could produce more opportunities for friction. The length of housing sections is another important consideration. If housing sections are excessively long, the housing can bend more than it needs to, which produces excess contact and friction with the cable. If housing sections are too short, the housing and ferrule may interface with the frame fitting at an angle that will allow the cable to drag along the end of the housing and ferrule. This creates a lot of friction. Housing should be just long enough to allow for the anticipated amount of handlebar rotation or suspension compression, and good alignment with frame fittings. Any longer, and you’re just adding unnecessary friction and weight. Electronic shifting eliminates everything I just talked about. As long as batteries are sufficiently charged, the right signal will get from the shifter to the derailleur. Any reduction of shift quality is the result of improper setup or worn or damaged components. During initial setup, a pairing procedure informs the shifter and the derailleur that they are to communicate with each other. Additionally, security protocols are coded into each component to ensure that no other component will work with it unless the two are paired with each other. In our next, and final video, we’ll look at some helpful setup and maintenance info.