When comparing drivetrain components offered by different companies, technologies can vary greatly. Each company has its own set of goals and design philosophies to meet those goals. In most cases, this creates incompatibilities between drivetrain components produced by different companies. Within each company, the technologies are often, but not always, more consistent. Differences within a category of products are often materials, tolerances, finishes, weight, stiffness, tested lifespan, performance quality over that lifespan, aesthetics, and of course, cost. Different riders will have different priorities when choosing components. Some may prioritize affordability over high-end performance and can choose entry to mid-level components. Others may be willing to spend more for higher-end components to gain the performance advantage. In either case, proper installation and care of drivetrain components will ensure that they can perform to their potential for longer periods of time. Following manufacturer installation and setup procedures is the first step. Keeping the system clean is paramount. Power washing or the use of harsh chemicals is not advised. Brushes, grease cutting soaps, light water pressure, and patience is all you need to keep equipment running smoothly. Occasional adjustments may be necessary, but are typically easy to do. For cable systems, periodic replacement of the cable and housing will ensure that the system doesn’t suffer from excessive friction, which makes the shifter harder to actuate and produces poor shift quality. Some bicycles route the shift cable and housing along the outside of the frame, and some inside. Externally routed systems are easier to service, but those with multiple housing sections allow contamination into the housing more easily than single section housing, or internally routed systems. Chain sizing is a very important aspect of shift performance. If the chain is too short, chain tension becomes high in larger gear combinations. If the chain tension is too high, the derailleur will have a hard time moving the chain. If the chain is too long, rear derailleurs that have offset upper guide pulleys will need additional b-gap adjustment to create the correct amount of chain gap. This will rotate the derailleur clockwise and reduce the amount of chain engagement with the cassette, known as chain wrap. And if the derailleur has a diagonal attack angle, the attack angle will no longer align with the cassette profile properly. In both cases, shift performance will be less than optimal. Full suspension bikes require a little more attention when installing chains than their rigid counterparts. This is because the distance from the center of the bottom bracket to the rear wheel axle can change during suspension movement. If the chain manufacturer’s chain sizing procedure is followed without the suspension being compressed, the chain may be too short for the system once the suspension moves through the entirety of its stroke. This can lead to chain failure, or damage to other parts. Notice: Be sure to follow special instructions for full suspension bikes when referencing chain sizing procedures. For similar reasons, rear derailleurs with offset upper guide pulleys should be adjusted for b-gap while the suspension is compressed to its most commonly ridden position, which is the sag position. Otherwise, suspension movement causing the chainstay length to increase will add tension to the chain. This will swing the cage forward, lower the upper guide pulley, and increase chain gap. Chainline is another important aspect of drivetrain performance. Chainline refers to the distance from the center of the bike to the chainring or center of the chainring cluster on the crankset. This dimension affects the angle at which the chain approaches the cassette and interacts with its shift features. Drivetrains are designed to perform optimally around specific chainlines. If the crankset does not align properly to the chainline, the chain will experience excessive friction when placed on the furthest inboard or outboard cogs of the cassette. This will also place excessive load from the chain against the chainrings and cassette cogs, resulting in premature wear of these parts. Additionally, poor chainline may cause the chain to derail from inboard cogs during backpedaling, or inadvertently catch chainring rivets on double or triple chainring systems. This can result in either a sudden and harsh release of the chain from the rivet, or a ghost shift to the next larger chainring. Proper chainline is achieved with proper frame dimensions, use of the correct bottom bracket, proper installation of the bottom bracket, and appropriate chainring offset in cases where multiple offsets chainring are available. More recently, electric-assist bicycles have gained popularity. For the most part, drivetrain components specified for e-bike use are similar to their non-electric-assist counterparts. However, with pedal assist, increased torque has become an important design consideration. When making decision about e-bike specifications, it’s important to make sure that components are intended to be used with e-bike drivetrains. If parts have worn excessively, they can exhibit poor performance that can’t be adjusted for, or worse, they can be dangerous. For example, a damaged or corroded chain could break during hard pedaling, which could cause the rider to lose control and crash. Another example is if there is any damage to the teeth on a chainring, the chain may not be able to release from it properly during pedaling. This can cause chainsuck, where the chain gets pulled into the frame or the derailleur, causing damage to those parts. So, don’t forget to inspect the system thoroughly, including the derailleur hanger, before making any significant adjustments. When replacing parts, remember that high-quality component groups are designed as systems. Aftermarket components suppliers may offer similar appearing or functioning parts, but there is the possibility that all of the needs of the whole system may not have been taken into consideration. To ensure safe, proper operation of the system at the highest level of performance quality, only use replacement parts designed, manufactured, and tested by the manufacturer of that system. That’s it for external drivetrains. For more information on drivetrain components, installation, maintenance, and compatibility, be sure to visit SRAM.com. Take care!