Over the last decade, E-bikes have surged in popularity among weekend warriors, racers, and new riders. E-Mountain Bikes or e-MTBs open a world of new riding possibilities for all skill levels. As a brand at the forefront of bicycle innovation, SRAM has created the most intuitive and integrated e-MTB system, delivering excitement and simplicity for all riders! Introducing SRAM Eagle Powertrain – a new system that extends beyond the conventional e-MTB drive unit. Eagle Powertrain takes a holistic view of the E-MTB experience, seamlessly integrating SRAM Eagle Transmission with the power of the SRAM AXS ecosystem. The goal of SRAM Technical University and this series is to help you increase your knowledge about e-bikes. And while most of this information will assist with understanding e-bikes in a broader sense, we will also take a deep dive into the advancements of our SRAM Eagle Powertrain system. Before getting too far, what the heck is an e-bike anyway? An e-bike is a motorized bicycle that utilizes the power of electricity stored in a battery to assist and power movement. E-Bikes come in many shapes and flavors. E-bikes are available for road cycling, gravel, commuting, and mountain biking. In this series and for our SRAM Eagle Powertrain system, we will focus on mountain biking and the e-MTB. Ranging from homemade offerings held together with zip ties, up to electric Motos with pedals, not all e-bikes are created equal, so let’s discuss the fundamentals. At its core, e-bikes store energy in a battery mounted on or in the bicycle frame; this battery powers a motor or drive unit that propels the bicycle forward; and a Human Machine Interface, or HMI, controls the electronics and makes calculations of how much assistance to apply. E-bikes are usually classified by their top speed and power assistance. For example in North America/The United States there are 3 classes of e-bikes. Class 1 is limited to a top speed of 20mph, or 32kph, and is only pedal assisted. Class 2 are also limited to a top speed of 20mph, or 32kph, and in addition to the pedal assist have a throttle for acceleration. Class 3 bikes are pedal assisted and can go up to 28mph, or 45kph, and must have a speedometer. They may or may not have a throttle. It’s essential to understand e-bike classes as this will usually dictate their intended use. Make sure to review the ebike regulation and categories in your area. The power assistance of an e-bike can typically be delivered through the hub, the chain via an idler pulley, or the chainring. Most often found on E-MTBs is the Mid-Drive Motor System, delivering additional power to the chainring as the rider pedals. The mid-drive system has two main benefits over other systems: the biggest is a more instant application of power to the drivetrain; but also, weight distribution with a more central battery and motor position. Compared to a hub motor, a mid-drive motor has lower unsprung mass. You can review our Suspension Theory modules for the importance of unsprung mass. However, this allows the bike to be more playful, and with the weight better balanced, riders can maneuver more efficiently in off-road situations. So in review, e-bikes systems are comprised of three primary components; the drive unit, the battery, and the human-machine interface or HMI. Here’s an easy way to remember the function of each component: The motor or drive unit is the system’s muscles; it takes inputs from other components and delivers power for the rider. The Battery is the heart of the system and supplies the energy. It powers the entire system by pumping electricity between the drive unit and the HMI. The HMI is the system’s brain, connecting and controlling the drive unit, battery, and other connected components to supply the right level of assistance to the rider for specific inputs and conditions. Those are the e-bike basics! In the next video we will explore some E-bike vocabulary.