We now know what an E-MTB is and some key words on how to discuss them. With that, let’s take a deep dive into the SRAM Eagle Powertrain. It’s more than just a drive unit, battery, and HMI – it is an entire AXS ecosystem, integrating seamlessly with our SRAM Eagle Transmission and providing the rider with market leading simplicity. The SRAM Eagle Powertrain system uses a mid-drive motor, which provides the benefit of neutral weight distribution and reduced unsprung mass. This mid-drive motor is belt driven providing a quiet experience for its riders. The spindle interface uses the ISIS bottom bracket standard, with SRAM Transmission cranks available for a direct fit. Our motor specifications include a continuous power of 250 watts, peak power reaching 410% of a rider’s input, and a Torque capable of 90nm. There are currently 3 different batteries offered: 2 internal, and one external. The two internal Batteries install in the downtube cavity, and the external battery mounts in place of a waterbottle cage, offering an extended range for even more epic time on the bike. Our battery specifications include a 630Wh and 720 Wh internal battery, and a 250 Wh external Range extender battery. Regardless of the battery size, the motor will still output at the levels aligned with the selected ride mode. While more range can be nice, the biggest battery does not always mean the best ride experience. This is because increasing the battery watt-hour output will also increase the system's weight. Applications like racing, or those requiring more agile handling, may benefit from a smaller battery that decreases the system's overall weight. With a powerful drive unit and an application-appropriate battery, an industry-leading brain for the system was needed, which lead to the development of the electronics that make up the core of the SRAM Eagle Powertrain. Eagle Powertrain brings new electronic technology to the E-MTB market, allowing for seamless integration between rider and machine. This leads to less time thinking about the proper setting, and more time riding your bike! The SRAM Eagle Powertrain system’s cockpit offers a unique advantage, utilizing our AXS system for a clean and wireless aesthetic. The only visible lines or cables at the front of the e-MTB are the brake hoses. This is accomplished using AXS Pod Controllers, which offer a wireless connection from the controllers to the rest of the Eagle Powertrain and Eagle Transmission systems. AXS Pod Controllers offer both short and long press functions, providing more control without adding buttons. For example, a function like a shift is a short press, whereas a long press can engage the PUSH mode. Looking to the rear of the bike, there are minimal visible wires for an external speed sensor, like you may be used to. Our speed sensor integrates with the non-driveside dropout, much like the UDH hanger design on the driveside. This is a specific frame design adopted by our OEM partners and supports internal routing of the speed sensor wire all the way to the drive unit. Within a speed sensor, a single magnet is adequate for most e-bikes with mechanical shift systems. However, Eagle Powertrain gathers increased data from a 6-Bolt rotor mounted speed ring which contains 6 magnets. This allows the Eagle Powertrain to deliver the most accurate, precise, and well-timed shifts throughout the different shift modes, achieving the highest performance of the Eagle Transmission possible on an E-MTB. Ride modes offer the user different levels of support in terms of watts output and torque from the motor. The different modes offer either higher performance or more battery savings. The SRAM Eagle Powertrain is meant to be simple for riders and offers two simple ride modes: ‘Range’ and ‘Rally.’ ‘Range’ is for the rider looking for an all-day, epic ride experience. Range mode conserves battery life for longer days and is perfect for commuting to the trailhead. Once a rider is ready to hit the trails, press one button for Rally mode to unlock maximum power. ‘Rally’ mode offers full support from the motor, meaning full power output and maximum watts. Rally mode is for the rider seeking maximum fun: on downhills, uphills, and everywhere in between. Compared to other multi-mode systems, Eagle Powertrain’s simple two-mode system makes it easy to determine which mode to be in, allowing the rider to focus on the trail ahead! To fine tune either mode to a rider's preference, adjustments can be made via the SRAM AXS app. The integration of the Eagle Powertrain and Eagle Transmission delivers an unparalleled experience on the trail, with features like Auto Shift and Coast Shift. Coast Assist allows the SRAM Eagle Powertrain System to shift itself while coasting. This is done on a software level where the drive unit will allow the chainring to turn even while the cranks are stationary and shift up or down the cassette. For the rider who wants full control, this means that on a decent, they can select their gear for the upcoming hill and be in the right gear before even turning the pedals. Auto shift offers predictive shifting depending upon the rider's pedaling input and system settings. It can be adjusted for rider preference on the bike while riding, or via the SRAM AXS app. This predictive shifting utilizes a complex algorithm for gearing selection and will shift automatically to put you in your preferred gear, every time. On a sprint it will consider big torque readings and will not shift until the desired pedal speed is reached. Likewise, on a loose climb, if the wheel loses traction, the system compares the wheel speed compared to the power input from the rider and shifts only when appropriate. This benefit is supported by the increased data collected from the 6-magnet speed sensor. Auto Shift can be disabled while riding, or leave it turned on, and the rider can still manually initiate a shift at any time, giving the rider total system control. It may even make the rider more efficient when they Rally too hard and forget to shift. Through a full system approach, SRAM has created the most intuitive and integrated e-MTB system with the SRAM Eagle Powertrain. These technological advancements benefit all riders: from new riders, to seasoned veterans, and even e-Bike racing champions. The SRAM Eagle Powertrain is completely customizable, smart, and intuitive, offering riders the Range to Rally.