Now that we know the basics of an E-MTB, let’s dive into some vocabulary. E-MTBs have many buzzwords; some you may have heard in physics class or from the existing pedal-powered bike world. But we are here to help define these terms and provide examples of what these feels like to the rider. First and foremost, power. Much like a car, an E-MTB's power is one of the most critical numbers that riders and brands talk about. There are many ways that power is used to talk about an e-mtb system. Most countries have a specific power rating for e-bikes regulating their continual use, or Continuous Power as we refer to it. This is the power that the drive unit can hold and sustain indefinitely. In most countries, this is 250 watts. Peak power is the short-term, maximum assistance from the drive unit. This can be talked about in terms of watts, but more commonly, it is discussed as a percentage of the input. For example, SRAM Eagle Powertrain offers a maximum power delivery totaling 410% of the rider input, or 565 watts. Peak power is used in short bursts to get the bicycle up to speed or up a steep hill, and when these are averaged with normal use, the Continuous Power will still be relative at 250 watts. We’ve thrown watt around a few times now, so WATT exactly are we talking about? Really? That's the best you guys have got? If you’ve viewed power meter theory, then you may have a grasp on what a Watt is, but let’s revisit and explore how it applies to E-MTB's. Simply, a watt is a unit of measurement for power or energy. From an E-MTB or power meter perspective, this is the force input through the pedals, or torque, multiplied by cadence, or the speed of pedal rotations. Understanding what a Watt is will be necessary when we talk about batteries and power output from the motor. An E-MTB's battery size or capacity is measured in watt-hours. A Watt-Hour is how much power the battery can expel within an hour. So, for example, if we look at a system with a 500Wh battery, and a motor applying 250 watts of Continuous Power, that will provide us with roughly 2 hours of ride time. That does not mean that all bikes will have 2 hours of use because power output varies depending on many factors, including: tire size, bicycle weight, rider weight, aerodynamics, temperature, and the terrain will all affect how much power these motors expel at any given time. Watt-hour capacity for batteries will help give the rider insight into the range of the system. Range is the term for how far or long you can go on a charge. Think about this like you would the size of a fuel tank on a car. However, range is not a fixed amount. It can fluctuate depending on battery size and weight. Raising the number of watt-hours means we need to increase the number of battery cells which in turn will add weight to the overall system, and thus the number of watts required to power the bike forward. And the biggest buzzword of them all, torque. Torque is the rotational force applied to the cranks. The greater the torque, the faster the system can accelerate. But, does this mean we want to have the maximum torque possible? The short answer, is no. Torque needs to be applied appropriately to maintain traction and control for the rider. If full torque were applied on a tight uphill corner, riders could get sent off into the bushes or lose traction. When putting the power down on a descent though, this maximum torque may be critical to give the rider the speed they need to conquer the obstacles in front of them. Having sufficient software to support this appropriately is key to the correct application of torque in an E-MTB system. That does it for E-MTB vocabulary. Join us for our next video, where we go into specific details for the SRAM Eagle Powertrain.