In order to measure torque and cadence, convert those measurements into power data, and move that data around the system, specialized components are assembled into power meters. To measure torque, a strain gauge can be installed to the crank at the spider. A strain gauge is a type of resistor that incorporates a circuit that can change shape as the material it’s attached to flexes. As current flows through the strain gauge, it moves along a path that winds back and forth multiple times, like a winding river. As the crank material flexes under torque, the river gets stretched so that the distance between each switchback increases, while the river itself gets narrower. This reduces current. The change in current can be measured and interpreted as spider flex in a specific direction. By using multiple strain gauges installed in very specific arrangements, errors can be cancelled out to increase accuracy. Because flex can vary from one material to the next, the relationship between flex and electrical output isn’t going to be consistent from one power meter to the next. So, each power meter needs to be calibrated. This is performed by applying a precisely controlled amount of torque to the crankarm and measuring the power meter’s electrical output. Then a calibration factor, known as slope, can be computed and programmed into the power meter. This slope ensures that each power meter can accurately and consistently produce data, regardless of inconsistencies in components. The stiffness of the chainrings and the length of the crank arms directly contribute to the amount that the spider will flex when force is applied to the pedals. The material stiffness and crank arm length are fixed values, but chainring stiffness is not. Chainrings stiffnesses can vary, depending on size or design. So, some power meters that use spider flex as a torque indicator will require re-programming of the slope when installing different chainrings. More sophisticated power meters can be constructed with added material in strategic locations to minimize responses produced by different chainrings. This allows for more consistent and accurate torque measurements, regardless of the chainring being used, so that that re-calibration isn’t necessary. A strain gauge can also be placed in the spindle instead of the spider. This allows the gauge to flex with the twisting of the spindle, producing a reading that can be converted into a torque value. One of the differences between spider and spindle-based torque measurements is that a strain gauge in the spider can measure torque generated by both crank arms. Since resistance to forward pedal rotation comes from the chain, placing the gauge between both arms and the chain allows it to measure flex produced by force from both arms. But by placing the strain gauge in the spindle, flex produced by the right arm can’t be measured because there is no gauge between the right arm and the chain. For this reason, spindle-based power meters are limited to measuring left leg power output only, whereas spider-based power meters can measure both left and right leg power outputs. Because spindle-based power meters take readings from a single side, the overall torque value used to calculate power is the result of doubling the reading from that side. That said, placing the strain gauge on the spindle eliminates the effects of chainring changes, so the overall system can be simplified. Simplifying the system not only allows for a more economical solution, spindle-based power meters can reduce the amount of material at the spider for a sleeker, lower-profile aesthetic. Fluctuations in temperature will change the volume and density of a material. Generally speaking, subjecting a material to lower temperatures will cause it to contract, while higher temperatures will cause it to expand. The same is true for the crankarm material, although to a small degree. When a spider or spindle expands or contracts, the strain gauges will register this as flex or compression, which will produce false torque measurements. Use of strain gauges designed specifically for different materials, and careful arrangement of multiple strain gauges can compensate for the effects of thermal fluctuations. Additionally, the power meter can be zeroed. Zeroing a power meter simply tells it that any strain detected while the power meter is at rest is to be regarded as zero torque, and any additional torque is to be based against that zero offset. Just like zeroing a rotor runout gauge, or taring a scale. Depending on the type of power meter, this can be done manually by using the cycling computer, or by an algorithm programmed into a microcontroller inside the power meter. In the case of an algorithm managed zero offset, torque signals from the strain gauges are continuously monitored during riding. If the rider is coasting and the crankarms don’t move, or the rider is backpedaling, friction from the rear wheel pulls on the chain a small amount. This creates a small amount of torque that can be measured by the strain gauge. If the cadence measuring component detects backpedaling motion, or no motion at all while torque is being measured, the microcontroller is able distinguish this torque from torque produced while pedaling. When these types of torque signals meet other criteria that are specified in an algorithm programmed into the microcontroller, a torque snapshot is recorded. Over time, enough snapshots are collected to allow the microcontroller to compute a new zero offset and apply it to the power meter. So that’s how torque is measured. Now what about cadence? Traditionally, cadence could be measured by placing a magnet on the bike frame and a reed switch on another circuit inside the power meter. A reed switch is a section of a circuit that is open, with a sprung connector. As the switch passes by the magnet, the magnetic force flexes the connector to close the circuit. The circuit completion and momentary allowance of current is recorded as an event by the computer. The number of events per a given time is recorded by the computer as cadence. Multiple reed switches are used so that multiple events can be recorded per rotation for greater accuracy. Multiple switches are also used for redundancy. If one reed switch ceases to function properly, the others can compensate. While simple, reed switches do have moving parts and can be fragile. Also, using multiple switches can be costly. And safely & securely fastening a magnet to the frame can be difficult. A more modern method of measuring cadence is the use of an accelerometer. An accelerometer is a capacitor that changes its behavior when accelerated in a direction. To understand this, let’s jump back into electronics for a moment, and look at capacitors in more detail. Imagine two metal plates next to each other. They both contain the same number of electrons. An interesting thing about electrons is that they repel each other with a force, even if they’re not connected in a circuit. You’ve probably seen something similar with magnets, where magnets will repel or attract each other depending on their polarity with respect to one another. If we connect the plates in a circuit, this force is applied equally across the space between the plates as well as through the circuit, so the electrons stay in place. If we place a component in the circuit between the plates, it doesn’t receive any energy, because there is no current. But if we place a battery in the circuit, things start to happen. Voltage from the battery not only powers the component, but it generates current across the entire circuit in a direction. This draws electrons from one plate and pushes them into the other. This is how a capacitor accumulates and stores a charge. The ability for the capacitor to store energy in the form of an electrical charge is its capacitance, which measured in Farads. When the battery is removed from the circuit, the buildup of electrons in the one plate generates voltage, just like a battery, which pushes the stored electrons back into the circuit, effectively pushing the original number of electrons back into the other plate, until there is an equal number of electrons in each plate again. At this point, there is no more voltage, no more current, and the component no longer receives energy. Now imagine that one of the plates can move relative to the other plate. If we fix the plate to a mass, we can give it inertia. If we suspend the plate and mass with a spring, and we accelerate the entire circuit in a direction, the plate will try to remain in the same place while the rest of the components, including the other plate, move. Once acceleration ceases, the spring returns the plate to its normal resting position. This allows the positions of the plates relative to each other to fluctuate with movement. As a result, the capacitance fluctuates. And if we attach a measuring component to the circuit, it can detect these fluctuations and interpret them as movement. This is the basic principle of an accelerometer. Accelerometers can measure acceleration in a variety of directions. Acceleration measurements relevant to cadence use gravity as a frame of reference. So, other inputs such as bike acceleration, bumps, leaning side to side, and changing terrain grades & bike angles, are filtered out using a proprietary algorithm programmed into the power meter. This allows the power meter to measure only information that is relevant to cadence. The components in an accelerometer don’t move nearly as much as with reed switches, which allows them to be more robust. And since accelerometers don’t rely on proximity to a magnet, any amount of crank movement can be measured at any point in the pedal stroke. Once torque and cadence are measured, a microcontroller in the power meter multiplies these values together to produce a power reading in watts. In our next and final video, we’ll look at how power information is transmitted to and managed by the cycling computer.