Power… it’s what puts everything in motion. On a bicycle, power is generated by the rider and transmitted to the bicycle through pedaling. Many factors contribute to the overall power picture. The combined weight of the bicycle and rider is a key factor, especially when accelerating or climbing. Aerodynamics is another major factor, determining how easily the bike and rider can move through the air. The bicycle’s ability to avoid or absorb energy from impacts affects how much power output is needed to overcome obstacles. Bicycles with multiple gearing options allow the rider to manage power transfer from the pedals to the rear wheel with varying levels of efficiency. And friction, both within the drive system and between the bike and the terrain, will affect how efficiently power is converted into forward movement. Because there are so many variables with the bicycle and the terrain, it’s impossible to get an accurate picture of rider performance unless a tool for measuring power output is applied to the rider themselves. Measuring rider power output before it is applied to and manipulated by the drivetrain is the best way to begin collecting pure, unbiased, unmodified data that can be used to gauge rider progress over time and compare performance between multiple riders. This is where the power meter comes in. A power meter is a device that measures power produced by a rider while pedaling. It starts by capturing data about the forces applied by the rider to the pedals. It then uses information about key parts of the drivetrain to convert this force data into a torque value. At the same time, data about the amount of time it takes to complete pedal revolutions is also collected. These torque and cadence measurements are calculated to produce a power value which is transmitted to an onboard cycling computer. The computer can display this information to the rider in real-time, or store it for later retrieval and more detailed analysis using specialized software. With this information, the rider can begin to understand their efforts, make adjustments to improve their efforts, and gauge the effectiveness of those adjustments. This could be for competition training, health management, or for people who just enjoy analyzing and managing their performance. In this series of videos, we’re going to look at how power meters collect data, how the data moves through the system, and what the data means. In our next video, we’ll discuss power in greater detail and how the electronic circuitry in power meters works.