Even simple bicycle suspension systems can be set up for specific riders. As systems get more sophisticated, additional adjustment can help the rider tune the suspension for specific riding styles and trails. Let’s take a look at some basic suspension setup. But before we get too far, it’s important to know that the performance of the system is greatly affected by the health of the system. If suspension systems haven’t been serviced regularly enough, friction can become a significant issue, especially with initial stroke. When dynamic seals get dirty and aren’t able to receive lubrication, they will feel sticky. Unfortunately, this isn’t something that becomes apparent suddenly. If the suspension feels fine today, the rider may perceive it to feel fine tomorrow, and the next day, and the next day. After several months, the rider may come to accept the current level of performance as normal, even if it’s not very good. But if a cleaning and re-lubrication service is performed, the rider will likely perceive a radical increase in performance. So, before you start threading on a pump, turning a wrench, or a knob, compress the suspension and evaluate whether or not it feels as good as it should. Ask the rider some questions like “Do you ride in dry, dusty conditions? Or very wet conditions? When was the last time you had service done?” Chances are, if the rider was happy on day one and they’re not happy now, they’re probably not having service done frequently enough. Now let’s look at tuning, starting with the spring. We’ve already talked about sag and how spring rates work. Now we can use sag to determine the proper spring rate for any rider. A commonly recommended sag range would be anywhere between 10 to 30 percent of the total travel. Suspension with lower amounts of travel can err on the low side, whereas longer travel suspension has more movement to work with and can go higher. We already looked at how to calculate 30 percent sag for a 150 millimeter stroke fork. The same can be done for rear shock. The numbers will be smaller, but the method is exactly the same. Of course, personal preference is also a factor, so a rider may wish to run a little more or a little less sag than what is recommended. This is ok, as long as it doesn’t negatively affect trail and handling, or the rest of the points in the stroke. For systems that allow for volume tuning, the next step is to assess whether or not the suspension is bottoming out too frequently. Occasional bottom out is ok. It means that all of the travel is being used. But if the rider bottoms out a lot, and the sag is set to the desired amount, reducing volume in the air spring is needed. Many high-performance spring systems allow for volume tuning without having to perform lengthy service procedures. For these systems, an adjustment can easily be made, tested, and made again if necessary, until the desired frequency of bottom out is achieved. Air pressure determines sag, volume determines progressiveness. So, if the sag was good, the same pressure can be used after volume adjustments have been made. On the flip side, if the suspension bottoms out too frequently, and other parts of the stroke are too easy to compress through, air pressure should be increased first, then tested. Then, if initial and mid-stroke feel right but frequent bottom out is still an issue, volume tuning is the next step. For systems that allow for negative volume tuning, think about the beginning and middle of the stroke. A larger negative spring volume will lower the spring rate at the beginning of the stroke. If the negative volume is large enough, this might make the spring rate so low at initial stroke that additional air pressure is needed to get the correct amount of sag. This is fine, as long as you remember that additional air pressure will also make the mid and ending stroke firmer. The proper balance between air pressure, volume, and negative volume adjustments allows for the best feeling suspension that provides good support at all points in the stroke. Once a good spring rate has been established, the next tuning feature to address is rebound damping. A good rebound speed is one that allows the suspension to react quickly enough for the next trail feature, but not so quickly as to bounce the wheel off the ground and lose traction. Getting to this sweet spot may require a little trial and error, and it may evolve as the rider changes their riding style. Of course, spring rate is a big factor. Remember that the spring is the only thing providing rebound force. Ok, the weight of the wheel and part of the suspension itself do factor in a little. So higher spring rates push back harder and need more control, and vice-versa for lower spring rates. Rider speed can also be a factor. The faster the rider, the less time the suspension has to react to trail features, so quicker rebound is needed. Slower riders may prefer the rebound to be slow and less perceivable. Most systems have externally adjustable low speed rebound and internally-valved high-speed rebound circuits. Only a very lightweight rider who runs a very low spring rate would need to decrease high speed rebound in order for the softer spring to be able to extend quickly enough. And decreasing low speed rebound can help with this, since the spring rate is very soft and traction loss from a quicker rebound speed toward top out isn’t likely to be an issue. Conversely, a much heavier weight rider who runs a very high spring rate would need more rebound control. This is because the shaft is rebounding with a lot of force behind it, and the transition from the faster high-speed circuit to the slower low- speed circuit might happen too close to top out to control bouncing. But for the majority of riders, customization of the high speed rebound circuit isn’t necessary. After rebound is properly set up, many riders can be on their way to safely enjoy their rides. For those riders who would like more control, specifically when it comes to the type of trail they’re on, they might want to start looking at low and high-speed compression damping. The distinction between low and high speed forces is fairly simple. This is low speed, and this is high speed. The difference has less to do with how fast the bike is moving, although that can be a factor, but more to do with the speed at which the spring and damper shafts are moving. When I push on the fork, the amount of time it takes for the shafts to get from point A to point B is noticeably different than if I slam the wheel into the ground, which is a nearly instantaneous movement. Now let’s look at that on the trail. Low speed features include berms, transitions, and g-outs. Essentially, any time the bike changes direction, the rider’s weight compresses the suspension, but relatively slowly. Other factors are rider movement on the bike and braking. High speed features include bumps and landings. Essentially anything that impacts the wheel. Of course, these speeds are on a spectrum. Applying the front brake with varying amounts of force can demonstrate this. But understanding what creates these different shaft speeds can help us understand what we’re tuning for when adjusting compression damping. Let’s do a thought exercise. We’re on a flow trail, we’ve picked up a decent amount of speed and we go into a berm. As we begin our turn through the berm, our weight is going to compress the suspension. If it’s the beginning of the season, the trails are smooth and we probably don’t need much compression control. We go through some travel, we come out of the berm, the suspension rebounds, and we’re ready for the next feature. But it’s the end of the season. And it’s been a dry season. The flow trails aren’t that flowy anymore. The braking bumps are strong. By transitioning through the berm, we’ve used up some travel, the front end is lower and steeper, and the spring rate is higher. So, we don’t have that much travel left, the steering is less stable, and the suspension is harder to compress. Then we hit the braking bumps. At this point, the suspension isn’t in the best place to be absorbing a series of harsh bumps. To fix that, we can increase low-speed compression damping. This will provide resistance to compressing at low shaft speed, which is what’s happening through the berm, so that we’re closer to sag where we have plenty of travel left, the head angle is still slack, and the spring rate is low. Then as we impact the braking bumps, the higher compression force opens the high-speed compression valve, which increases fluid flow. This allows the suspension to become more compliant and absorb the bumps more easily. Then as we exit the braking bumps, the fluid pressure goes back down, the high-speed compression valve shuts, and the fork rebounds. Now, we could have increased air pressure to keep the suspension more upright though the berm, which it would do. But everything else suffers for it. Sag and negative travel, traction, bump absorption, all of it. Also, because low speed compression makes the fork feel firmer when you do this, many people have tried to use it to compensate for a low spring rate. The problem with this is that the damper doesn’t support the rider, it slows down the rate of compression. If we maxed out the compression damping and removed the spring entirely, the suspension would collapse completely. It might take a couple of seconds, but it will happen. So, if the spring rate is too low, the suspension will compress past the proper sag point to support the rider, regardless of the compression damping setting. So, it’ll have less positive travel, incorrect geometry, and if it’s an air spring, it’ll feel too progressive since compression begins further in the spring rate. This is why we set the spring up for rider weight first, then we use the compression damping to tune for specific situations. That said, too much low speed compression in bumpy sections can make the suspension feel harsh. High-speed compression does the same thing as low speed, but for impacts. Let’s say that we’re on a super bumpy technical trail. If we go through too much travel on the first bump, we may be in a bad spot for the second bump, for all of the same reasons, travel, geometry, and spring rate. And if it’s a steep trail, our bodies might be far enough over the front wheel that we’re now in danger of handlebar vaulting. So, we can increase our high-speed compression. This requires higher force to keep the high-speed compression valve open so that fluid flow returns to a restricted state quicker, preventing the suspension from going through too much travel. One drawback to high-speed compression is that it affects all impact forces. So, small bump sensitivity and traction diminish as high-speed compression increases. This is why high-speed compression should be used sparingly. Efficiency circuits can be used to reduce or eliminate pedaling-induced compression forces. These forces can be produced in a number of ways. Riders with cadences that are bouncy can compress the suspension as they pedal. This allows the spring to absorb some of the energy that is meant to be transmitted to the rear wheel. Also, some frame designs place pivots in locations that allow the chain to pull the rear linkage system upward or downward during pedaling. If the chain pulls the rear wheel downward, compression forces end up opposing pedaling force, so that each time the suspension compresses, pedaling gets harder. Finally, many suspension frames experience an increase in the distance between the center of the bottom bracket and the center of the rear axle during stroke. As the axle moves further away from the bottom bracket, it pulls on the chain, making it harder to pedal. By activating an efficiency circuit, such as a lockout or pedaling platform, the shock becomes much more difficult to compress. This preserves the transfer of pedaling energy to the drivetrain and stops the rear axle from moving. Efficiency circuits are designed so that the valving can open and allow the suspension to compress with enough force. This is to prevent over-pressurization of the fluid and damage to suspension components when encountering high force impacts. In some cases, this force threshold can be adjusted externally. A well-adjusted threshold can create pedaling efficiency while still allowing for some compliance. But like high-speed damping, use of efficiency circuits can result in harshness and less traction over smaller bumps. So, they should only be used when pedaling efficiency is a higher priority than control, comfort, durability, and traction. As I mentioned before, suspension performance is affected significantly by a lack of maintenance. If seals and bushings aren’t cleaned and lubricated periodically, they can start to make the suspension feel sticky and they can generate friction and heat which can affect the performance of the spring and the damper. If the outermost seals wear, they can allow dirt and debris into the system, which accelerates seal wear, which accelerates contamination, which accelerates seal wear, and so on. And since the chassis serves as both a structural part of the bike and the housing for the springs and dampers, damage to the chassis can cause significant performance issues, and possibly make the bike unsafe to ride. Keeping the suspension clean, following the suspension manufacturer’s service recommendations, periodically inspecting suspension components for wear and damage, and replacing those components as necessary will ensure high performance, long product life, and safe, progressive, fun riding. That’s it for suspension. For more information about suspension products, parts, and maintenance, be sure to visit sram.com. Take care.