One type of spring commonly used as a main spring in suspension is the coil spring. Coil springs are wires that are designed to flex and return to their original shape, wound into a coil. Coil springs are designed around four criteria, the ability for the coil to properly fit the suspension system, the coil’s spring rate, the coil’s ability to repeatedly flex without permanently deforming or breaking, and the ability for the coil to compress far enough to allow for full stroke without the coils contacting each other. Achieving these four goals relies on the right combination of wire material, thickness, length, coil diameter, free length, and pitch. One of the benefits of using coil springs in a suspension system is simplicity. Coil springs don’t rely on sealing pressurized air in a chamber, so there isn’t the need for seals or carefully manufactured sealing surfaces to create the spring itself. And because there aren’t as many seals in a coil system, there isn’t as much seal friction. Seal friction manifests in two ways; static friction, or stiction, which can make the suspension feel less smooth during initial movement, and dynamic friction, which creates heat in the system as the suspension is moving. When an air spring is heated, its pressure and spring rate increase slightly. Coil springs remain consistent because there are fewer seals creating less friction and heat, and any change in temperature that does occur has little effect on the elasticity of the coil. Finally, a simpler system is less expensive to design, manufacture, and maintain. Disadvantages to using coils for the main spring include weight and lack of tunability. Because coils are made of metal instead of air, they are heavier. Also, air spring rates can be adjusted a number of ways. Coil springs aren’t adjustable, so any change in spring rate requires replacing the coil with a different one. For riders, the most important aspect of a coil spring’s design is the spring rate. Because different weight riders need different spring rates, multiple coil options are available. From a design perspective, there are a couple of obvious ways to change a coil spring’s rate. For a softer spring, a coil with a thinner wire can be used. For a firmer spring, a thicker wire can be used, as long as the increase in thickness doesn’t limit how much the coil can compress relative to the overall stroke. You can also change the spring rate by using different materials. Steel springs and titanium springs with the same dimensions can have different spring rates just because different types of metal can have different elasticities. You can also change the spring rate by changing the length of the wire. This concept is based on leverage and the force compressing the spring. Since a coil is a wire wound into a specific shape, applying force against the ends of the actively flexing coil is much like applying force to the active ends of the wire. If the active wire is shortened, the amount of leverage that the force is applied with is reduced, making the wire harder to flex the same distance. The same is true with a coil. If a coil were to be cut, the spring rate would increase, and the total distance that the coil is able to compress would be reduced. Coil springs, leaf springs, and other simple mechanical springs have linear spring rates. This makes the systems that they are paired with feel more predictable and allows them to achieve bottom out easier than if they were paired with a progressive spring. Coil spring rates are designated by how many pounds of force are required to compress the coil one inch. Another important designation is the amount of stroke that the coil is designed to accommodate. This coil has a spring rate of 400 pounds per inch and fits on shocks with strokes anywhere between 57.5 and 65 millimeters. When using a coil spring, suspension designers need to be aware of how much the coil can compress before it makes contact with itself. This point is called coil bind. Coil bind is very harsh since it’s literally metal colliding with metal. So, the overall stroke of the shock must be less than the total distance the coil can compress before binding. Coils can be constructed with varying rates. This coil has tighter spacing, or pitch, for part of its length. The spacing allows part of the coil to bind while the remainder still has room to compress. The result is a shorter length of wire in the remaining active coil. And since shorter spring wires are stiffer, this results in a secondary, higher spring rate. Progressive coils use a similar concept, but with more gradually varying windings to produce a coil with a more curved rate. Multi-rate coils cost more to produce than single rate coils, but they provide more bottom out resistance without affecting the rest of the stroke. Coils are easier to flex outward than in a linear path. This is called deflection. The more a coil is able to deflect, the lower rate it’ll have. Fortunately, deflection is more common with longer coils in forks. Since these coils are contained in a tube, they can’t deflect significantly. However, when they do deflect, they make contact with the inside of the fork’s upper tubes, which creates noise and vibration. To counter this, soft rubber heat shrink sleeves can be attached to the coil at the areas of greatest deflection. A commonly misunderstood aspect of coil springs is the concept of spring preload. Preload is the result of compressing a spring without initiating stroke using spacers or an adjuster. The effect of preload on the spring rate can be represented on a graph by shifting the entire spring rate to the left. Preloading a coil makes it feel firmer, since more force is required to compress the spring earlier in the stroke. However, the material, thickness, and length of the coil wire don’t change with preload. So, the rate remains unchanged. If we add a significant amount of preload to the spring, this produces a high breakaway force. Any impact forces lower than this breakaway force will not be absorbed by the spring, and will instead, be transmitted to the bike and the rider. This also moves the coil bind point closer to bottom out. One benefit of preload is that a small amount can firmly capture the spring so that it doesn’t vibrate. Also, a small amount of preload can be used to advance the spring rate in the event that the desired sag can’t be achieved with any of the available coil rate options. Some riders may opt to install a slightly undersprung coil, then use preload to advance the rate until the desired sag is achieved. But excessive preload should never be used as a substitute for proper spring rate as small bump sensitivity is reduced, risk of harsh bottom out is increased, and a preloaded spring is constantly placing load on the system, which can lead to long-term durability issues. Instead, replacing the coil with a higher-rate coil can allow the rider to achieve the desired sag without adding a high breakaway force or risking coil bind before bottom out. And in most cases, the increase in spring rate will produce a greater resistance to bottom out than preloading the softer coil. In our next video, we’ll take a look at air springs.