As sophisticated as a spring can be, it’s still relatively simple in that however quickly force is applied to it, it will compress that quickly. And however quickly force is released from a spring, it will rebound that quickly. And this may not always be good for the ride. If the suspension compresses too quickly, you may find yourself too far into the travel to be ready for the next trail feature. If the suspension rebounds too quickly, momentum can be generated which can cause the suspension to bounce. This is bad for traction. So, something needs to control the energy being delivered to and released from the spring. That’s where the damper comes in. A damper is a device that can control the speed at which something moves. Suspension dampers can be broken into two sub-components, the compression and rebound damping circuits. Within those sub-components are more sub-components, which we’ll get into later. Compression forces can be generated in a number of ways. Simply pushing or shifting weight on the suspension creates compression force. A moving rider has momentum, and that momentum can create a compression force when paired with a bump, slope change, or direction change. Rebound forces are generated solely by the spring and any momentum the spring generates. A basic damper can be constructed from a few key elements. The damper body houses much of the componentry. Some forks and rear shocks incorporate part of the chassis as the damper body. Like a spring assembly, the wheel is connected in some manner to a shaft which has a piston attached to it. The piston has orifices, or ports, in it. Unlike a spring piston, a damping piston isn’t meant to compress anything, it’s meant to move through something in a controlled manner. In the case of most modern dampers, that something is fluid, also known as shock oil. And to make sure that the fluid stays in the damper, a seal head is used at one end. The other end is a little more complicated. We’ll discuss that shortly. As the damping piston moves through the fluid, pressure increases on one side of the piston and decreases on the other. The faster the movement, the greater the pressure. Like most things, fluid has a natural tendency to move from areas of high pressure to areas of low pressure, however it can. In this case, the fluid flows through the ports. This controls one of two things; how fast the shaft can move a certain distance with a given force, or how much force is required to move the shaft a certain distance over a period of time. This can be changed in a number of ways. The viscosity of the fluid can change the flow rate. More viscous fluids require more time per force or force per time to flow. Fluids become less viscous when heated, some more than others. So, operating temperature can affect the flow rate. The size and number of ports can also change the flow rate. And fluid can flow in ways other than just through ports in the piston. In some dampers, a glide ring, or wear band, can be fitted on the piston. This not only creates a replaceable bearing between moving parts, it can be fitted loosely to allow fluid to flow around the piston. The looser the fit, the higher the flow rate. In some instances, a vertical or diagonal split in the glide ring can provide for a small amount of flow. The shaft that the piston is attached to can have a flow path through it. This design allows for an externally adjustable flow rate. If a sealed rotating sleeve, rod, or needle is incorporated in the shaft, it can be oriented so that as it turns, it can partially or completely cover the flow path through the shaft. This can be paired with an externally accessible adjuster that allows the user to make changes to the flow rate without having to disassemble the damper and alter any components. This is a big step in creating a tunable damper. Unfortunately, this adjustability controls the flow rate on both compression and rebound, which may not be what the rider needs. So, separation of compression and rebound damping control is necessary, and the way to achieve that is with a check valve. A check valve partially or completely restricts fluid flow in one direction, with little to no effect on flow in the other. This could be as simple as a shim or washer placed flat against one side of the piston and held in place by a spring. When fluid pressure increases on the side opposite the check valve, the spring flexes and the shim is pushed away from the piston, allowing fluid to flow. But when the damper changes direction and the pressure increases on the check side of the piston, the spring will extend, pushing the shim against the piston, and blocking fluid flow. This forces the fluid to find a different flow path if there is one. Check valves used with specially-designed pistons can create different flow rates on compression and rebound through the same piston. This piston has a number of large ports that extend to the face of one side of the piston and to a step on the other side of the piston. The same is true on the opposite side, except that the ports are smaller and fewer. Placing check valves on both sides of the piston creates unique flow rates. The flow path with the highest flow rate and the lightly sprung valve is the compression path. The path with smaller ports and a more firmly sprung valve is the rebound path. This assembly also has a path through the shaft that is metered with a needle and externally accessible adjuster. With the needle completely clear of the central flow path, moving the assembly upward is easier than downward because of the greater flow area and less fluid pressure required to force the check valve open. Moving it downward requires more force or time since the flow rate is less and the steel shim is harder to flex. But the difference isn’t that perceptible since the majority of flow is facilitated by the central flow path. But if the needle is adjusted upward to obstruct the central flow area, the difference between the two flow rates increases. The compression circuit should still have a minimal perceptible effect when moving the damper upward, but downward movement becomes much more difficult. So, this assembly is designed to allow for adjustable rebound speed with little to no effect on compression. This model can be inverted to do the same thing, but for the sake of compression control. And both iterations can be included in a damper to offer independent external adjustability of both compression and rebound. Before we get into separate compression and rebound damping circuits, we need to look at how fluid interacts with them. In this example, we get fluid to flow through the rebound circuit by moving the rebound piston through the fluid. The rebound piston is fastened to the damper shaft, which is fastened to the lower leg of the fork, which is fastened to the wheel, and it moves inside of the upper tube, which is fastened to the bike. So, when compression forces push on the wheel, the rebound piston moves through the upper tube and fluid, then the spring pushes the spring shaft and lower leg back toward top out, taking the damper shaft with it. For this model, the compression circuit is located at the other end of the upper tube and remains there during stroke. It doesn’t move through the fluid like the rebound piston does. So, in order for fluid to interact with the compression circuit, we have to move the fluid. This is made possible using displacement. Displacement is when fluid moves to make room for something else. When ice is added to a glass of water, the water is displaced to make room for it, and the water level rises. In the case of a damper, the damper shaft is the ice. As the suspension compresses, the damper shaft moves into the damper through the seal head. This forces fluid upwards to make room for the shaft, which creates flow through the compression circuit. So, the damper shaft moves into the fluid, the rebound piston moves through the fluid, and fluid is displaced through the compression circuit, all at the same time. Since displacement moves fluid to make room for the damper shaft, there needs to be a place for the fluid to go. Some systems will incorporate a small volume of air inside the damper body. This air pocket can compress to make room for the fluid. This is referred to as an open system. Open systems are simple and helpful for heat management. As suspension fluid is cycled back and forth in a damper, it heats up. Heat can change the viscosity of the fluid, which affects flow rate. Having a volume of air for heat to radiate to helps stabilize the fluid’s temperature and viscosity. Unfortunately, having a volume of air in a damper body can allow for air to be drawn into the fluid in the form of bubbles. This is called aeration. Once the fluid aerates, the bubbles will move though the damping circuits where turbulence will break them down into smaller bubbles. Eventually, the fluid can turn into foam. Since foam is less dense than fluid, it changes the flow rate through the circuits, reducing the damping effect. Open systems will typically be designed in a way that minimizes the effects of aeration, either by placing the damping circuits far away from the air pocket, or by designing the flow areas to work optimally with aerated fluid. Some dampers are closed systems, where fluid and gas are separated. One example of a closed system uses an internal floating piston, or IFP to manage displacement. This is a sealed piston located between the fluid and the air pocket. As fluid is displaced, the IFP moves with the rising fluid level. IFPs can be paired with a coil or gas spring to create pressure against the fluid and stabilize the piston. In rear shocks, a high-pressure gas charge can be used with an IFP to help stabilize damping fluid during drastic pressure changes. IFPs eliminate aeration but add another friction component with any seals on the IFP. So, stiction and heat can be greater factors when using an IFP. A flexible bladder can also be used to compensate for displacement. Similar to a sprung IFP, a bladder ensures that air and fluid remain separated. Bladders have an advantage over sprung IFPs in that an IFP will have one or more seals creating friction, whereas the bladder is the seal and the spring all in one. In some forks, an open bath design may be used. This is similar to an open system, except that the fluid is contained within the damper body as well as the lower legs. The benefit to this design is that the fluid can circulate to more areas for cooling. It also can serve double duty and provide lubrication for the chassis bushings and seals. The drawbacks are aeration and added weight with more fluid. In each of these cases, fluid is displaced to an area where a spring force is applied to the fluid, whether it’s from a gas pocket or IFP spring compressing, or a bladder expanding. This spring force adds to the main spring to create an overall spring rate for the suspension. But aside from the main spring, none of these springs should be altered to tune the overall spring rate, otherwise the damper may not operate properly. Through-shaft systems do not displace fluid since the shaft enters one end of the damper while simultaneously exiting the other end. However, they still need to allow for some compensation since fluid volume increases as it gets hot. Without the ability to compensate for the increased volume, the damper could overpressurize, resulting in seal failure and a fluid leak. Getting back to fluid control, check valves can be modified in a way that allows them to control fluid flow at different pressures. When we think about what creates compression forces, we can create a spectrum from low compression force to high compression force and apply different compression events across that spectrum. For example, dropping off a ledge to flat, or hitting a square edge rock at speed will create high compression forces. Leaning back and forth, feathering the front brake, or going through a berm, g-out, or transition all create low compression forces. These events create different forces and pressures in the system that can be controlled separately using orifice style-damping, or check valves with varying degrees of spring force applied to them. Let’s get back to our compression damper. The needle controls the size of the flow area, and the check valve resists flow until enough force is applied to it to compress the spring and open the valve. Now, let’s go back to a concept I introduced when talking about coil springs, preload. When a mechanical spring is preloaded, it resists compression until the compression force exceeds the preload force. If we add an adjuster to the compression check valve that preloads the spring behind it, we can control how much force is needed to compress the suspension. Now, let’s pair that with the needle adjustment. If the rider goes through a berm, the suspension will compress with low force. By turning the needle and reducing the flow area, the rider can set the suspension to resist compressing with this low force. This allows the suspension to stay higher in its travel. If the berm were the only feature, this adjustability wouldn’t be very important for control, comfort, durability, and traction. But if there were a bump or a series of bumps in the berm, the suspension being deep in its travel could be problematic. The geometry could be off in a way that affects handling, the spring rate could be high at this point making the suspension feel harsh, and there might not be enough travel left to absorb the impacts. So, adding this type control by reducing the flow area keeps the suspension higher through the berm, which is a good thing. But it can also make the suspension feel harsh once the rider encounters the bumps. This is because the higher velocity forces produced by the bumps increase the fluid pressure to a point where the fluid molecules bottleneck as they try to get through the port. This is called spiking. Once the fluid spikes, it stops flowing until the pressure is released. This is where the sprung check valve comes in. The check valve requires force to open and adding preload to the valve spring requires even more force. So, the check valve can alleviate spiking, or it can be adjusted to change how active the suspension is during high compression force events. This method of controlling flow for different compression forces is known a speed-sensitive damping. Controlling flow with low force is called low-speed damping, and with high force is called high-speed damping. And since compression forces are on a spectrum, control can also on be a spectrum. It’s not low or high-speed damping, it’s low to high-speed damping. In this example, we illustrated a system with external adjustability for both high and low-speed damping. Systems can be designed like this to allow the rider full control, or some features can be pre-tuned without external adjustability. This can be to simplify a system for riders who want to be able to enjoy their ride without having to be suspension experts. Another application for check valves is an efficiency circuit. Referred to as a pedal platform or lockout circuit, its purpose is to isolate compression forces created by pedaling while still allowing the suspension to compress after a certain force threshold has been reached. In many cases, the efficiency circuit is activated by completely closing off a low-speed circuit. This diverts fluid flow to a check valve that has an aggressively preloaded spring, a spring with a very high spring rate, or a stack of shims that require a lot of force to flex open. For adjustable efficiency circuits, the spring preload, the amount of spring compression required to open the valve, or flexibility of the shims can be adjusted externally. Speaking of shim stacks, stacking shims is another method of controlling flow through a high-speed circuit. Instead of using a preloaded valve, flexible shims can be used as a check. One shim can provide a basic check. Thicker shims, or additional shims can increase the overall spring rate of the valve. Shims of varying diameters can create a progressive damping effect. This goes back to another concept we looked at with coil springs, the length of the wire. In this case, we’ll substitute the wire with a leaf-type spring. The factors that determine spring rate are the same. Material, thickness, and length can be manipulated to make the leaf spring easier or harder to flex. And just like a shorter wire, a smaller diameter shim is harder to flex since it forces the fluid to push against the shim with less leverage. The difference between using a sprung valve versus a shim stack is that a shim stack that isn’t preloaded will always allow for some flow. This means that low compression forces are absorbed, which can help with traction over smaller bumps. At the same time, the configuration of the shim stack can tune for sensitivity as the compression forces increase. Medium to high compression forces can be absorbed or resisted by different amounts depending on the shim configuration, while still maintaining small bump sensitivity. If some resistance to initial flow is desired, a shim stack can be constructed with preload built into it. And a combination of a preloaded valve and one or more shim stacks can be used for the greatest amount of tunability. Of course, all of this might raise questions of how, when, and why to make damping adjustments. We’ll cover that later in this video series when we discuss tuning. But for now, let’s just focus on understanding how these technologies work. On the rebound side, things are very similar except for one fundamental difference. Compression forces are determined by a number of factors, trail features, rider speed, rider weight, rider position, how the rider handles the bike; rebound forces are determined by one thing, the spring. This isn’t to say that spring force is always the same. In fact, spring force will vary depending on where in the stroke the suspension begins to rebound. If the suspension compresses, say, 10 percent through its stroke, the spring isn’t compressed very much, so the rebound force is low. Also, when the spring shaft changes from compression stroke to rebound stroke, there is a brief moment that the shaft begins to accelerate from a stop. It takes time and distance for the shaft to accelerate to full speed. If the suspension only compresses to ten percent of its total stroke, there isn’t much of either before the suspension tops out. Deeper in the stroke, the spring force increases, and the shaft has more time and distance to accelerate. What this means from a damping perspective is that one rebound speed may not be appropriate to properly control the spring’s energy at different points in the stroke. If the suspension compresses, say, 25 percent, the rebound speed should be slow enough to prevent the suspension from bouncing. 25 percent isn’t far into the travel and rebounding that last 25 percent to top out shouldn’t take too long, so a slow rebound speed works. But if the suspension goes through most, or all of its stroke, a slow rebound speed might prevent the suspension from returning to sag before the next trail feature compresses it again. When the suspension isn’t able to recover in time for the next feature, it stays deep in the travel, which is bad because again, the geometry could be off, the spring rate could be high, and there might not be much travel left. The rider could adjust rebound speed to be faster, but then the suspension is bouncing at top out again. A sophisticated rebound damper can be speed-sensitive, just like a compression damper. By using orifice-style damping to control the rebound speed with low spring force, and a sprung valve or shim stack to control rebound speed with high spring force, the rebound speed can be allowed to be fast deep in the travel for rapid travel recovery, then slower as the suspension approaches top out to avoid bouncing and traction loss. This is how high and low-speed rebound works. And again, these can be made adjustable, either internally or externally depending on what riders might want or need for adjustability. Designers need to be aware of potential issues when designing a damper. If fluid flow is too restricted, cavitation can occur. Cavitation is where the fluid pressure on one side of the piston decreases significantly and rapidly enough that a void in the fluid forms. When the pressure normalizes again, the void can collapse, and it can do so with enough force to create a shockwave that can cause damage to surrounding parts. Even if cavitation isn’t severe enough to cause damage, it can result in inconsistent damping. Rear shocks experience higher force differentials than forks. This is due to frame leverage ratios and the fact that rear shocks support rider weight more directly than forks. More on that later. Rear shocks need to be able to restrict fluid flow for damping, but very high forces combined with restricted flow can lead to cavitation. So, an IFP with a highly pressurized gas pocket behind it keeps enough pressure on the fluid so that when significant de-pressurization does occur, the force from the IFP stabilizes the fluid to prevent cavitation. Temperature can be a factor with dampers. Constantly fluctuating pressures and friction can heat up damping fluid, and cold weather can of course cool it. Fluid viscosities can change with temperature. Maple syrup is a good analogy for this. If you heat syrup, it gets significantly thinner. Cooling it makes it significantly thicker and slower to flow. Water, on the other hand, doesn’t change nearly as much with temperature change. A good suspension fluid should behave more like water and not change viscosity significantly when subjected to temperature changes. Some change is inevitable, but most modern fluids are engineered to operate within a temperature range that most dampers will experience. Debris in a damper can affect performance by blocking flow paths. Most dampers are sealed well enough to keep out large particles. So, if a damper suddenly gets very slow without any adjustments being made, it’s worth checking to see if any of the components within the damper have broken. Debris can also prematurely wear seals and sealing surfaces. If a damper is overfilled, it can experience hydraulic lock, or hydralock. This is more common with open systems where too much fluid has been put in the damper and has nowhere to displace to. This can also occur if a damper seal in a fork fails to retain fluid, and the fluid migrates into the lower legs. Water ingestion through worn chassis seals can also fill the lowers to the point where the fork can no longer compress. Emulsification is a permanent suspension of one substance into another. When contaminants like water or gas are introduced into damping fluid, they tend to stay separate from the fluid. However, rapid cycling of the damper eventually breaks down a contaminant until its particles are small enough to remain suspended in the fluid. Once this happens, neither gravity nor filtration can separate the substances. The result is an overall change in viscosity and performance characteristics of the fluid. Periodic replacement of damping fluid is important to keep the fluid working properly and remove any contamination that can cause these issues. In our next video, we’ll look at friction in suspension systems.