Suspension Theory - Addendum How Shock Pumps Work In this video, the term shock applies to any air sprung shock absorber, including suspension forks and rear shocks. Did you know that there is a right and a wrong way to use a shock pump? Well, there are lots of wrong ways. But I’ve seen a number of people doing things with shock pumps that they don’t need to do. Let’s take a quick look at how shock pumps work and what you should and shouldn’t be doing with them. When you pull back on the pump handle, a seal on a piston inside the pump opens, allowing air to be drawn into the pump. When you push on the handle, the seal shuts and pushes air into the hose and out of the pump at the pump head. If you look into the pump head, you’ll see threads that fasten the pump to the shock, a rubber o-ring or grommet to seal the pump to the shock, and a pin that pushes a valve in the shock open. If you could see into the shock, you would see the valve. Specifically, a Schrader valve, that is sprung so that it can be pushed open to let air in or out, and then released to seal the shock. Now, when we attach the pump to the shock, a couple of things happen. First, we thread the pump onto the valve body. When we do this, there is a moment when we’re not doing anything other than fastening the pump to the shock. We’re not sealing anything or unsealing anything. So, if I were to try to pump air into the shock, the air would just go around the threads and into the atmosphere. If I thread the pump on a little more, the grommet in the pump’s head gets squeezed against the top of the valve body. Here’s where things start to happen. At this point, the pump is sealed to the shock, but the Schrader valve is still closed. So, if I try to pump air into the shock now, the air goes into the valve body, but no further. And if the grommet is sealed well enough, the gauge on the pump will suddenly register a really high pressure. That’s because I’m trying to cram all the air that was in here, into here. And it’ll fit, but it’s going to create a lot of pressure. That whole “number of air molecules per volume” thing. If I thread the pump on more, the pin in the pump head will push the Schrader valve open, the grommet will get squeezed even tighter, and we’ll finally be able to pump air into the shock. So, then we do that. We pull a bunch of air into the pump, push it into the shock, and do it over and over and over and over again, until we get the pressure we want. Then we take the pump off, and this is where we get to the point of this whole video. I’ve seen a lot of people do interesting things at this point. Sometimes they’ll pump a little extra air into the shock, or they’ll try to get the pump off as fast as they can, or they go buy some thing that they don’t need. And the reason they do that is this. They think air is escaping from the shock while the pump is coming off. I mean, it makes sense, you can hear it. So, they put in a little extra air to compensate for what they lose, or they take the pump off really fast so that they don’t lose too much air. Or they use the thing because the makers of the thing say they need the thing. But here’s the thing. That’s not what’s going on. When you unthread the pump from the shock, the first thing that happens is the Schrader valve closes. Once that happens, the shock is sealed, so nothing’s coming out of it. Ok, so then what’s with the hiss? If you look at the gauge, it should still register the pressure that you pumped the shock to. That’s because when the Schrader valve closed, it separated the shock and the pump, but they both still have pressurized air in each of them. If you keep unthreading the pump, eventually the grommet unseals from the valve body, and the pressurized air that’s still in the pump goes around the threads and comes rushing out. When I explain this to people, they’ll say “Ok, that makes sense. But if I didn’t lose air out of the shock, why does the gauge show a lower pressure when I put the pump back on?” That goes back to the whole air per volume equals pressure concept. Once the air rushes out of the pump, the pump is relatively empty. I mean, there’s air in it, it’s just at the same pressure as the air outside of it. But when we re-attach it to the shock, some of the air from the shock goes into the pump, until they are at equal pressure, which will be slightly lower than the pressure that was in the shock. So, you just pump more air into the shock until the pressure is where you want it, and you’re good. No extra air needed, take the pump off as fast or slow as you want. Make a day of it. Have some snacks. Now all that said, if the Schrader valve isn’t installed properly or it’s damaged, then you may have a legitimate issue. Check to see if the tip of the valve sits just below the top of the valve body. If not, see if you can thread it in until it does. Don’t get too carried away or you could damage the valve body. If you can’t easily thread it to the right depth, the valve needs to be replaced. Fortunately, Schrader valves are pretty inexpensive and easy to replace. Suspension Schrader valves are designed for high pressures, so make sure you’re using the right kind of replacement valve. Don’t just pull one out of an old tube. And put the cap back on. A Schrader valve is great for letting air in and out of the shock easily, but it’s not meant to be the valve’s primary seal. And if it does allow for some air loss, the cap has an o-ring in it that is the primary seal, and it’ll keep the air in the shock where it belongs. Shave weight somewhere else, not here. Here are a couple more helpful bits of info. Let’s go back to the part where we reattach the pump to the shock. When we do this, we essentially create one large volume for all of the air in both the shock and the pump to occupy. Again, this is why a pressurized shock combined with a relatively empty pump will register a lower pressure than previously achieved. And if the size of either the pump or the shock change, the amount of pressure drop will also change. For example, one shock might have a lower air volume chamber than another shock. If we were to pump both of them to the same pressure, then remove and reattach the pump, the shock with the lower volume will register a lower pressure. Another example would be using different pumps on the same shock. If we pump a shock to a given pressure, remove and reattach the pump, and note the pressure drop, then repeat this exercise with a larger pump, the larger pump will register a lower pressure upon reattachment. Finally, the pressure in the shock will affect the outcome. Higher initial pressures won’t change as much as lower pressures when attaching the pump. This is because a shock with higher pressure has more air to share with the pump once it's attached. Now, if you’ve watched this and you still wonder if your shock might be leaking, here’s a simple exercise you can do to be sure. Pump the shock to the desired pressure, remove and reattach the pump, record the pressure reading, then pump the shock back up to the desired pressure. Remove the pump, put the air cap on, and go for a good, solid ride. Then attach the same pump and check the pressure. If it’s the same as the earlier recorded pressure, you’re good. Pump it back to the desired pressure, put the cap back on, and keep riding. However, if it is registering a noticeably lower pressure, it may be time to have the shock’s air spring serviced by a qualified technician. And that is how a shock pump works. For information about suspension parts and installation, be sure to visit SRAM.com. Take care! Google and Schrader are registered trademarks of Google, LLC and Schrader-Bridgeport International, Inc., respectively.