The most common type of spring in bicycle suspension is the air spring. An air spring is the result of a sealed chamber, with a piston at one end that is able to move within the chamber, compressing and decompressing a volume of air molecules. When the air molecules are grouped together, they behave like a spring in that pushing them into a tighter grouping creates pressure, which in turn creates an opposing force. This is similar to the elasticity of a mechanical spring and can be manipulated a variety of ways to create various spring rates. There are many benefits to using an air spring as the main spring in a suspension system. The first is that an air spring is lighter than any type of mechanical spring. The second is an easily adjustable spring rate. To change the spring rate of an air spring, a rider can use a pump to add or remove air molecules from the air spring chamber. This raises or lowers the pressure acting against the piston, which changes how much force is required to push the piston though its stroke. Air pressure is infinitely adjustable, so air springs can be adjusted to accommodate any weight rider. The third benefit is that the progressiveness of the spring can be adjusted. In order to understand this, let’s take a look at how air spring rates work. Air pressure is the result of the amount of air molecules in a chamber of a given size, or volume. This can be expressed as pressure equals air per volume. If either the amount of air molecules or the volume of the chamber changes, so does the pressure. Now let’s take a look at how this relationship affects spring rate as the air spring moves through its stroke. When we install the air spring top cap into this fork, we trap air molecules in the air chamber. But if we install a pump with a pressure gauge onto the system, it would read zero. This doesn’t mean there is no air in the system. It just means that the pressure inside the fork is the same as outside the fork, since the distribution of air molecules per volume is the same. The gauge on the pump doesn’t account for the atmospheric pressure that it sits in. It only measures the difference between the pressures inside and outside of the fork. Since there is currently no difference, the spring pressure registers as zero. When we compress the system, we change the relationship by decreasing the volume of the chamber with the same number of air molecules. The result is an increase in pressure. We can also increase the pressure by leaving the volume the same and pumping more air molecules into it. Or we can do both, which is what we do when we pressurize the suspension and compress it. Now let’s do a thought experiment that can help you understand why air springs are progressive and how we can adjust that progressiveness. We’re going to be discussing area, volume, pressure, and force. So, let’s first look at some basic mathematics. I already mentioned that pressure is the result of the number of air molecules in a certain volume. In the case of an air chamber, that volume is determined by the area of the cross-section of the inside of the chamber multiplied by the length of the chamber. In addition to pressure equals air per volume, pressure is also the product of force per area. This is a relationship that we use a lot when working on bicycles. Think of any time you use the term PSI. PSI stands for pounds per square inch. Another way to write that is pressure equals pounds over inches squared. Pounds is a measurement of force, inches squared is a measurement of area. So, pressure equals force over area. If you use bar, the relationship is still the same. One bar equals 100,000 Newtons per meter squared. Newtons is a measurement of force, meter squared is a measurement of area. So, again, pressure equals force over area. And if we do a little math, multiply both sides by area, these cancel out, area times pressure equals force. Now that we’ve looked at the math, let’s get back to our thought experiment. Let’s imagine that we have an air chamber that is 8 inches in length. And in that air chamber is an air piston with a surface area of 1 square inch. I’m sorry, I thought maybe you would get that one. It’s fine, I’ve got it. With a length of 8 inches and a surface area of 1 square inch, the total volume of the air chamber is 8 cubic inches. And this works if we use millimeters, or centimeters, or light-nanoseconds, or horses, or hands. Look it up. Now let’s say we pump enough air molecules into the air chamber to create 100 pounds per square inch of pressure. That’s 100 pounds per square inch pressing against a piston that has a surface area of 1 square inch, resulting in a starting spring force of 100 pounds. Here’s where it gets interesting. Let’s go back to this relationship; pressure equals air per volume. If I have an air chamber that’s 8 inches long, and I wanted to cut that in half, I would have to move the air piston 4 inches. Now, doing so cuts the volume in half as well. Now, if we cut the volume in half with the same number of air molecules, we double the pressure. So, initially, we started with 100 psi. That’s 100 pounds per square inches being applied to a piston with a surface area of 1 square inch, creating a spring force of 100 pounds. So, at top out, we’re at 100 pounds. Then, we cut the chamber in half by moving the piston 4 inches, doubling the pressure and the force to 200. Now, let’s do it again. Let’s cut the remaining chamber in half. We’ve got 4 inches left, which means cutting that in half is 2 inches of movement. So, we’re cutting the volume in half again, which is doubling the pressure again. So, moving 2 inches doubles the pressure from 200 to 400. Let’s do it again. We’ve got 2 inches left. If we cut that in half, we only have to move the piston 1 inch. We’re cutting the volume in half, we’re doubling the pressure, but we’re only having to move 1 inch to do that. So, we go from 400 to 800. And if we connect the dots, you can see we have progression. Now, when we compress suspension, we don’t compress 4 inches, 2 inches, 1 inch, we hit all of the points in the stroke. So, what this graph would actually look like, is a curve. We can manipulate how this curve progresses by changing the initial volume of the air chamber. Now, let’s use this same model, but with a volume reducer installed to see what happens. Well, the first thing is, we won’t need as many air molecules to reach 100 psi. The second thing is, if we move the piston 4 inches, that’s actually cutting the volume by more than a half, which increases the pressure by more than double. So, depending on how much we reduce the volume, we could potentially be at that pressure at 4 inches. And then as we move an additional 2 inches, we’re going to deviate even more. When we move the additional 1 inch, the deviation continues to increase. So, we end up with a spring rate with a steeper curve. And the opposite is also true. If increase the volume, we get a shallower curve. So, to summarize, we use air pressure to create spring force. A certain amount of spring force supporting a certain weight rider creates a certain amount of sag. Sag is important in helping to maintain traction. We can also change the progressiveness of the spring, making it more, or less resistant to bottom out. Before we go any further, we need to address an unfortunate side effect of our thought experiment. That is, the 100 pounds per square inch of pressure acting against a piston with a surface area of 1 square inch, creating a downward force of 100 pounds. This is known as a breakaway force, and it’s problematic when trying to maintain control, comfort, durability, and traction, because a spring needs to be able to absorb any amount of energy. Having a high breakaway force means that any time the suspension is able to extend to top out, trail features that don’t produce forces greater than the breakaway force will not be absorbed by the suspension. Instead, they will produce a shockwave that will be transmitted to the bike and the rider. Or, if the rider performs a jump or a drop, the suspension will likely compress upon landing, but the initial impact will be harsh. This would be like riding on a coil shock with a lot of preload applied to the spring. So, we need to fix this, in order for the suspension to perform optimally. The solution is a negative spring. A negative spring is a spring that applies force to the underside of the air piston, effectively helping the bump force overcome the breakaway force. Any amount of force applied by the negative spring will bring the breakaway force down by the same amount. If the negative spring applies the same force as the force produced by the main spring, the breakaway force goes away entirely. One type of negative spring is the coil negative. By placing a coil spring against the bottom of the air piston, force that is applied to the top of the air piston gets transmitted to the coil, compressing it until either the forces are equal, or the coil binds. If the desired air pressure is the same as the pressure required to bind the coil, the breakaway force is reduced to zero. Then, as the piston moves through its stroke, the coil negative spring extends until it no longer exerts force against the piston and ceases to contribute to the overall spring rate. This is a simple solution, but it does present some challenges. If the rider weighs enough to require a higher spring rate, coil bind at the negative spring is achieved before the appropriate main spring pressure is achieved. This means that the negative force produced by the coil is lower than the force produced by the main spring. The difference in forces manifests as a breakaway force. If the rider requires a lower spring rate, coil bind won’t be achieved. Since the coil is integrated with the air piston and shaft, full compression of the coil is needed in order for the air shaft to extend to its full potential length. This has a direct effect on stroke and travel as the amount of stroke in the system is determined by the extended length of the spring shaft. So, the negative coil needs to be specific to the rider’s weight, which means that multiple negative coil rate options must exist in order for riders of varying weights to fully benefit from the technology. Even if multiple options exist, the shock must be disassembled in order to change the coil, which negates the benefit of simple air spring rate adjustment. Another type of negative spring is the air negative spring. By placing a separate air spring between the bottom of the air piston and the seal head, air pressure can be used to generate a force to oppose the force created by the main air spring. Some systems allow the user to adjust air pressures in the main and negative springs independently. If done properly, breakaway force can be reduced to zero. If not, the system can suffer from side effects similar to those experienced with improper coil negative spring rates. Other systems eliminate the possibility of these side effects by incorporating a bypass between the main and negative chambers at top out. This allows both of the air chambers to be filled simultaneously through a single fill valve. When the system is at top out, the bypass allows both chambers to effectively be one chamber with the air piston suspended in it. When the piston advances through its stroke, the two chambers become separated, and the main air spring pressurizes while the negative air spring depressurizes. The same factors that determine the exponential progression of the main air spring also apply to the negative spring, only in reverse since the volume of the negative chamber increases during stroke. The result is an exponential drop in negative spring force as the piston moves through its stroke. This means that the effect of the negative spring is greatest during initial stroke, then becomes exponentially less effective through the stroke. However, the overall spring rate is the result of the net difference between the positive and negative spring forces at all points in the stroke. So, the pressures and volumes of both chambers contribute to the overall spring rate, with lower volumes in the main and negative springs producing sharply curved rates, and higher volumes producing more linear rates. One final point worth mentioning with regards to main and negative air springs is that the air piston doesn’t actually have the same surface area on both sides. On one side, the shaft consumes a portion of the area of the piston that the air pressure acts against. What this means is that equal air pressures on the top and bottom of the piston don’t produce equal forces. As a result, there will always be some amount of breakaway force, and the amount will depend on how much of the surface area of the piston on the negative side is consumed by the shaft. Fortunately, there are ways around this such as top out bumpers acting as secondary negative springs or changing the bypass point in relation to the piston seal. In this scenario, equal pressures on both sides of the piston is achieved at the point where the seal crosses over the dimple. But this is higher than where the piston would sit at top out. With equal pressures applied to different areas, the top being larger and the bottom being smaller, less force is produced against the bottom of the piston. This means that the force from the main spring is higher and will push the piston down until the pressure in the negative chamber increases and the pressure in the main chamber decreases to a point where the different pressures applied to different surface areas produce the same force. This creates a true equalization of forces, which brings the breakaway force down to zero. And if designed correctly, this happens exactly at top out. Pretty cool, huh? Earlier in this video series, I mentioned that linear spring rates are good at addressing all the points in the stroke in a way that feels natural to most riders. This is one reason why coil springs are still used in suspension despite being heavier and less tunable than air springs. We looked at how manipulating the volume of the main spring changes the progressiveness of the spring at bottom out. We also looked at how the volume of the negative chamber changes how rapidly the negative spring’s effect on overall spring diminishes. And finally, we just looked at how placement of the bypass point can manipulate pressures and forces in the main and negative air springs. If we look at all of this together, we can see that a truly linear air spring may technically not be possible. But, careful manipulation of all these features can allow us to create an air spring that feels very similar, if not indistinguishable, from a coil spring, with the added benefit of being easily tunable in a variety of ways. It is fair to say that air springs suffer from more friction than coils since air pistons and seal heads need to be sealed well enough to retain air at high pressures. Excessive friction can manifest as static friction, or stiction, which can be felt any time the suspension begins to move. Dynamic, or running friction also occurs, and this generates heat. When air molecules are heated, they get excited, and the air column tries to expand. In a sealed volume, this creates pressure. There are some riders who say they can tell the difference in air spring feel at the top of a descent versus the bottom. And there are some who say they can’t. But proper lubrication of air seals helps to eliminate much of this friction, which allows the suspension to move more smoothly and generate less heat. In our next video, we’ll look at dampers.