The most important component in suspension is the spring. Without the spring, there is no suspension. And there are many types of springs. In fact, you can use just about anything that’s elastic as a spring. A leaf spring, like this damping shim, is a very simple type of spring. Similarly, a wire can be used as a spring. These types of springs require an arcing movement to flex. However, if the wire is wound into a coil, force can be applied to it linearly. Coil springs are very common in bicycle suspension. Also very common are pneumatic, or gas springs. Gases are compressible and can absorb, store, and release energy just like mechanical springs. Gas springs are light and easy to manipulate, which makes them very popular with bicycle suspension. The most common type of gas spring is the air spring. Nitrogen can also be used when a gas that is more pure and stable is needed. Polymers such as plastics, carbon fiber, and rubber are used in a variety of ways in bicycle suspension. The main spring manages energy produced by the rider’s mass, or impact forces created by mass and velocity working against trail features. The main spring absorbs energy during the shock’s compression stroke, stores it as long as the energy remains applied, then releases it during the rebound stroke. This prevents the energy from being transmitted to the bike and the rider. Main springs in bicycle suspension are typically constructed using part of the chassis as the spring chamber, with a piston attached to a shaft that is in some way connected to the wheel. When the wheel receives compression forces, it pushes the shaft and piston through the spring chamber, compressing the spring. In a suspension fork, the spring is secured by a top cap. For rear shocks, the spring is secured by either a coil preload adjuster, or an air can. When the compression force is released, force from the spring pushes the piston, shaft, and wheel back toward top out. Finally, the spring assembly is captured in the spring chambered by a base assembly, or in the case of an air spring, a seal head. Secondary springs can also be used to manipulate the overall spring characteristics of the suspension, or to cushion parts against one another to prevent harsh impacts and vibration. Springs are also used in suspension dampers. Compression and rebound valves, check valves, shim stacks, floating pistons, and bladders all use spring force to manage oil pressure and flow. The measurement of the amount of energy managed by a spring is referred to as the spring’s rate. Spring rate measures the amount of force required to compress the spring a specific distance. When the spring is at rest, there’s no force applied to it, so it doesn’t compress any distance. But as force is applied, the spring compresses. We can graph this by putting force on the vertical axis, and distance on the horizontal axis. As the spring advances through its rate, we start at zero force/zero distance, and move to the upper right indicating an increase of both. If the spring rate changes, so does the slope of the graph. A softer spring rate will have a shallower slope, a firmer spring rate, a steeper slope. One important aspect of spring rate is the difference between linear spring rates and exponential, or progressive, spring rates. Linear spring rates require an equal amount of additional force to move through an equal amount of additional distance. For example, if a spring requires a certain amount of force to move a certain distance, twice the amount of force will compress the spring twice the distance. On a graph, this appears as a straight line. Progressive spring rates require more than an equal amount of additional force to move through an equal amount of distance. For example, if a progressive spring requires a certain amount of force to move a certain distance, to compress the spring twice that distance may require more than twice the force. On a graph, this could appear as a line with different slopes, or a curved line. And depending on the way the spring is designed, that progression could occur early or later in the stroke. The most common question regarding springs is how to determine the proper main spring rate for a rider. Since riders come in all shapes and sizes, suspension needs to be able to accommodate for different forces produced by the rider’s mass, or weight, as it’s paired with momentum and applied to trail features. A good main spring rate is one that suspends the rider at a point in the stroke that allows for plenty of compression to absorb trail features. It also allows the suspension to extend, effectively pushing the wheel towards the ground during events where the trail moves away from the rider such as dips, recesses between bumps, or off-camber turns. This is a very important aspect to maintaining traction. The point in the stroke where the rider’s weight is suspended is called the sag point. Sag is the measurement of how much the suspension compresses to support the weight of the rider, any equipment the rider is carrying, and the portion of the bicycle above the spring. Sag can be used as a metric to determine if the spring rate is appropriate for the rider. It’s measured as a percentage of the total stroke. For example, if you wanted to set a 150 millimeter fork to 30 percent sag, you simply multiply 150 by 0.3, to get 45. You then set the spring rate so that the fork compresses 45 millimeters when the rider is on the bike, with all of their gear on, in their normal riding position. Another factor to consider with spring rate and sag is bicycle geometry. You don’t necessarily have to run the recommended sag. But frame designers design their bikes around an ideal height and angles. For example, if there’s too much overall sag, the suspended portion of the bicycle will sit closer to the ground, which changes the overall center of gravity and can affect how the bike handles. Also, if either the front or rear suspension has too much or too little sag, the angle of the bike with respect to the ground will change, which also affects how the bike handles. We’ll discuss more on bicycle geometry and handling later in this video series. Other important points in suspension stroke are beginning stroke, mid-stroke, and ending stroke, although these terms serve more as descriptors than actual measurable points in the stroke. Initial stroke starts at top out and extends into the stroke to around the sag point. Suspension that is designed to be more active during initial stroke allows the suspension to absorb smaller impacts rather than bounce off of them. This is key to maintaining traction and helps to reduce fatigue. That said, bicycles rely on human power to accelerate, and active suspension can absorb some of this power instead of transmitting it to the drivetrain. So, some suspension systems may be intentionally designed to be less active early in the stroke in order to allow for more efficient transfer of power from the rider to the rear wheel. More sophisticated systems allow the rider to switch between more or less active initial suspension while riding. Mid-stroke is where much of the suspension movement occurs during riding. As a result, the spring rate in this portion of the stroke is important in maintaining proper geometry, as well as absorbing moderate to severe compression forces. As the suspension compresses past mid-stroke, it goes into the end of the stroke, and then to bottom out. The spring rate at the end of the stroke is the primary factor in determining how easily the suspension is able to achieve bottom out. Getting to bottom out frequently and easily is a sign that the spring rate is too low, too linear, or both. However, if the suspension never bottoms out, this is a sign that the spring rate is too high, too progressive, or both. It’s ok to reach bottom out occasionally, as this is an indication that the rider is able to utilize all of the suspension travel available to them. But excessive bottom out can cause a loss of control or damage to the bike. Linear spring rates manage all of these aspects in a way that feels natural to most riders. And a coil spring is a simple solution to achieve a linear rate. In our next video, we’ll take a look at coil springs.