The last suspension component to discuss is the chassis. In this video, we’ll look at the suspension chassis first, but we’ll also look at suspension frame designs and how they work with different shock and fork configurations. First, let’s look at the different chassis components of a fork. When discussing suspension fork chassis, stiffness and weight are two major design considerations. Stiffness can refer to the resistance to flex from forces applied to the front or back of the fork, vertically through each side of the axle, known as splay, and rotationally through the axle. Stiffness in each of these areas has a significant effect on the handling of the bike. For axle rotation and splay, maximum stiffness is desired for predictable steering. For fore and aft movement, a slight amount of flex in addition to normal suspension compression helps the suspension remain compliant over bumps and upon landing. However, too much fore and aft flex can negatively affect geometry and body positioning relative to the front axle. Now, let’s look at the different parts of the fork chassis. The steerer tube attaches the fork to the bike. Older forks used straight steerer tubes with diameters ranging from 1 inch to 1.5 inches, the most common being 1 1/8 inch. Most modern forks use a tapered steerer with 1 1/8 inch at the stem and 1.5 inches at the crown. Steerer tubes can be made from steel, aluminum, or carbon fiber depending on the intended use. The crown attaches the steerer tube to the rest of the fork. Crowns can be made from aluminum or carbon fiber. Crowns can be sculpted or hollow for weight savings without paying a significant strength or stiffness penalty. Crowns can also come with different offsets for different geometries and handling characteristics. Crown offset refers to the distance between the center of the steerer tube and the center of the fork legs. Most modern crowns are press-fitted to the steerer tube. Stanchions, or upper tubes, attach to the crown, and house the spring and damper assemblies. Upper tubes can be attached to crowns using a press fit or clamping bolts. Upper tube diameters and thicknesses will vary depending on the desired stiffness and strength. Upper tube lengths are determined in part by the fork’s travel. Wheel travel and size, as well as the intended geometry of the bike contribute to the overall fork length, which then determines the length of the upper tubes. The finish on the inner surface of the tube will vary depending on the type of spring or damper contained within it. Coil springs don’t require that the tube have an inner surface capable of sealing air with low friction. Dampers that don’t use the upper tube as the damper body, known as cartridge-style dampers, also don’t require as high a quality inner surface. The outer surfaces of upper tubes need to be able to work with seals to keep lubrication in and contamination out of the lower legs, while also being impact and wear resistant, and smooth for good suspension feel. Overlap of the crown and the upper tubes plays a significant role in fork strength and stiffness. Overlap refers to the amount of interface between the two. Think of a fence. If the fence post is only buried a small amount, the fence will be flexy, and might even be blown down in a strong wind. But if you bury the fence posts deeper, the fence becomes stiffer and stronger. The same is true with upper tubes and crowns. Unfortunately, too much overlap can reduce travel unless the overall fork gets longer. But then that affects geometry. A solution to this is the dual crown fork. Also known as a triple clamp fork, with the axle, lower crown, and upper crown forming the three clamping points, dual crown forks have one crown below the headtube and one above. The idea is that by fastening the upper tubes to both crowns, the overlap is extended drastically. This creates a lot more stiffness without having to alter the distance from the axle to the crown, which is the most important dimension when determining the correct length fork for a frame. Having the upper tubes extend upward past the lower crown does reduce the turning radius of the bike and requires bumpers to keep the upper tubes from impacting the frame. But most dual crown specific bikes aren’t intended to be used in situations where tight turning is a factor. The final part to look at with suspension forks is the lower leg. Lower leg is actually a broader term encompassing the legs on each side, an arch that the two legs, a brake mount, and in many cases, an axle. Lower legs can be made from magnesium, carbon fiber, or aluminum. The lower leg attaches to the wheel and slides along the upper tubes using a set of internal bushings. Seals at the top and bottom of each leg keep lubrication in and contaminants out. The lower leg also bolts to the spring and dampers shaft, effectively connecting them so that the behavior of one is influenced by the other. Typically, the lower leg is cast as one piece. However, some older designs use bolts to couple the legs and arch. Some lower legs have dropouts to support a 9 mm bolt-on or quick release axle, while others incorporate a 15 or 20 mm thru-axle mounting system for more rigidity and strength. Some lower legs include International Standard, or IS mounts, or post-mount disc brake tabs. Older or entry level forks may have brake bosses for cantilever or linear pull brakes. Specific placement of material on lower legs can be used to increase strength and rigidity, reduce weight, and create aesthetic effect. The brace is one of these areas that balances careful placement of material to maximize torsional and splay stiffness without adding too much weight. Some lower legs can be ovalized, adding more material to the front and back of the legs to add fore and aft stiffness. Also, more material placement around each bushing can offer support in those areas where fore and aft loads work to ovalize or stretch the bushing and leg material. This not only reduces flex, but also helps to prevent casting stretch. Casting stretch is where fore and aft forces amplified by the length of the lever from where the tire contacts the ground to where the lower leg bushings contact the upper tubes, can permanently ovalize the inside diameter of the legs. When this happens, the fit between the bushings and the upper tubes can become loose, resulting in bushing play. Bushing overlap also plays a part in fore/aft stiffness. Similar to crown and upper tube overlap, the greater the amount of overlap, the stiffer the fork. However, travel is affected since the upper tubes must always engage both bushings and greater overlap requires that the lower bushing be lower, which reduces the amount of available stroke. Like crowns, offset can be manipulated at the lower leg, specifically with the placement of the axle in relation to the center of the lower leg. Thru-axle systems typically have more offset with the center of the axle needing to be pushed forward more to make room for the axle’s diameter. In this case, the crown offset can compensate for the additional lower leg offset, so that the total fork offset can remain within the desired specification. I’ve mentioned geometry and handling a number of times, now let’s look at this relationship in detail. With suspension forks, this can be summed up with one word; trail. Trail refers to the distance between the steering axis and the contact patch of the front tire. Imagine a line going straight through the center of the steerer tube into the ground. Mark that point. Now look at the center of the contact patch. Mark that point. Now measure the distance between them. That’s trail. The amount of trail has a huge effect on steering. If you push a cart with wheels that are on casters, you can see the effect of that relationship very easily. If this cart has the casters pitched forward and I start to push it, what happens? The wheels immediately spin to the back, following the caster bearing. The wheel has rolling resistance, and as long as that resistance is able to overcome the friction at the caster bearings, the wheel will naturally trail behind the center of the caster bearings. Now let’s look at the bike. The headset is the caster bearing, the wheel has rolling resistance. Because the contact patch is behind the steering axis, this same self- centering behind the steering axis effect occurs. Of course, we can fight this by turning the handlebar. But the greater the amount of trail, the more effort we have to put into turning the bar. And the more effort the ground has to put into turning the bar. This is why bikes with lots of trail feel more stable when descending at speed, or more sluggish when climbing. On a fast descent, the rider has momentum to get over obstacles and doesn’t want those obstacles to turn the bar. Lots of trail can help here by making the bike more stable. When climbing, the rider is trying to maneuver around obstacles. Lots of trail makes this harder by making the bike more sluggish. Conversely, a bike with less trail feels unstable on fast descents but responsive on climbs. Factors that can alter trail are; head angle, a more slack head angle increases trail, offset, less fork offset pulls the wheel back from the steering axis, creating more trail, wheel size, larger wheels place the fork higher which pushes the steering axis more forward. Forks with adjustable travel can be made shorter, which steepens the head angle for less trail and more responsive steering on climbs. It also puts more rider weight over the front wheel, increasing front-end traction for more productive steering. They can be made longer, which reduces the head angle for more trail and stable steering on descents. It also puts the rider further away from the front wheel, reducing the risk of handlebar vaulting on steep descents. Rear shocks chassis tend to be simpler than suspension forks. In addition to being smaller, they essentially remove the lower leg and place the spring around the damper rather than next to it. The shock is mounted to the frame using eyelets with bushings or cartridge bearings, a trunnion, or a yoke. Eyelets are narrower and placed at each end of the shock whereas trunnions are wider and placed at the sides of the shock. They both allow for rotational movement of the shock in the frame. Some yokes use a clamp around part of the damper body. This is a fixed, non-rotating mount. Frame manufacturers can choose between a combination of these mounting styles based on their own design specifications. The damper body contains the damping components like you would see in a fork, as well as an IFP and high-pressure gas chamber. In some cases, the IFP and gas chamber are located in an external reservoir, often referred to as a piggyback. The benefit of a piggyback reservoir is that fluid can momentarily circulate away from the heat sources in the damper body, cool, then return. This also allows for additional fluid for heat to radiate to. The paths to and from the piggyback also create additional flow paths where additional adjustability can be located. External adjusters must be placed in locations that allow for accessibility within a variety of frame designs. For coil shocks, the damper body has threads on which a preload collar can turn to adjust the fit and preload of the coil. The other end of the coil is held in place by a removable coil retainer that fastens to an eyelet or trunnion. For air shocks, the spring is housed in an air can around the damper body. It’s fastened and sealed to the eyelet with a seal and bushing system connecting it to the damper body. The damper body serves as the air shaft, complete with an air piston that also doubles as the damper seal head. Because the damper body also serves as the spring shaft, the outer surface of the damper body must be treated to provide a sealing surface capable of sealing high air pressure with low friction. Because the air shaft is located externally, the same surface must also be durable enough to withstand impacts, as well as dirt and water contamination. Shock compatibility with frames is complex. Not only do the shocks need to have the correct overall dimensions, mounting types, stroke, and have the adjusters located in places the rider can access, the spring and dampers need to be tuned appropriately for the leverage scenario designed into each frame, known as the frame’s kinematics. The topic of kinematics is also complex. Design decisions are at the discretion of the frame designer, not the shock supplier. We’ll briefly look at some of these concepts, but if you’d like more detailed information about a specific frame manufacturer’s design philosophies, I recommend you look at that manufacturer’s technical information. With suspension forks, stroke and travel are the same. With rear suspension, this is rarely the case. For example, let’s say we have a bike that has a rear shock with 65 millimeters of stroke. Now, by the time that 65 millimeters gets amplified through all of the pivots, and bars, and links, and rockers to get to the rear wheel, that number could go up to 160. Or less, or more, but we’ll go with 160. This forms a relationship known as a leverage ratio. And if we divide both of these numbers by 65; 65 divided by 65, of course, is 1. 160 divided by 65 is of course 2.46153846, which we’ll round to just 2.46. So, the leverage ratio for this bike is 2.46 to 1, which we can shorten to just 2.46. Pretty easy. But it’s not just a distance thing. This also affects compression force. Imagine your mass, your speed, the size and shape of a bump all conspiring to produce a force against your rear wheel to compress the suspension, now multiply that by 2.46. The amount of force going into the rear shock is going to be much higher than what’s delivered to the fork. This means that the coil spring rate or air pressure in the shock needs to be pretty high. And if the spring rate is high, the rebound damper needs to be able to provide more control. This means that the rebound and compression valves need to be much more firm, otherwise they’ll open too easily. This means that the oil pressure will increase and decrease a lot, so there will need to be an IFP with a lot of gas pressure behind it to stabilize the oil. This means that heat can build more rapidly, so an external reservoir can be helpful. At the very least, the damper body should be exposed to air flow so that it can cool during riding. Now, this is just one example of a leverage ratio. Some frames have higher ratios, some have lower, which is why rear shock dampers need to be tuned specifically for the frame they are to be installed to. And if that wasn’t enough to think about, leverage ratios can change through the stroke. A leverage ratio that increases through stroke makes the shock easier to continue to compress. The spring force continues to increase, it’s just that it’s easier to overcome that spring force because the frame is providing more leverage. This is referred to as a falling rate suspension. Conversely, a leverage ratio that decreases through stroke, making the shock harder to continue to compress is referred to as a rising rate suspension. It’s helpful to understand a frame’s rate when determining the type of spring to use with it. If a falling rate frame… Falling rate?! This line is clearly moving up… Remember that a Falling Rate is when the leverage increases through the stroke, making the force required to continue to compress the suspension decrease. Carry on. If a falling rate frame were paired with a linear rate coil spring, the result would be suspension that is too easy to achieve bottom out with, even if the spring were the correct rate for the rider’s weight. So, an air spring would be a better choice. The progressiveness of the air spring paired with the falling rate of the frame would create a more linear overall suspension. Then, volume tuning could add more progressiveness to the end of the stroke if desired. Conversely, a progressive air spring paired with a rising rate frame might be too progressive overall to achieve full travel. A linear coil spring, or an air spring designed to have a more linear feel would be the better fit here. In our next, and final video, we’ll take a look at suspension setup, tuning, and maintenance.