In all my time teaching bicycle mechanics, the one thing I’ve noticed people struggle with the most is removing fork lower legs. Not because the process is difficult, but because there are a couple of things that aren’t immediately obvious when looking at a fork. In this video, I’d like to show you what’s going inside of a fork’s lower leg so that you can easily remove and install lower legs as part of any fork service. First, a little terminology. The lower leg refers to the part of the fork that the wheel attaches to, and moves up and down during suspension movement. This is sometimes referred to as the sliders or a casting, since it’s typically cast from a single piece of material. Some people will also say lower legs, or just lowers. This is fine, but we will usually say lower leg since, again, one piece. Now, let’s move on to anatomy. Inside the lower leg are seals, bushings, a bottom-out bumper, and lubrication. The lower leg fastens to the rest of the fork by way of bottom bolts that go through small holes at the bottom of each leg and thread into the spring and damper shafts. A crush washer is placed between the bolt head and the lower leg as a secondary means of sealing these holes. I say secondary, because a key aspect of assembling the lower leg to each shaft is a press fit between them. This means that the shaft is slightly larger than the bore it sits in. Tightening the bottom bolts pulls the shafts into the bores, which expands the lower leg material slightly. This does two things; it fastens the shafts to the lower leg, so that if the bolts were to ever come loose, the shafts wouldn’t easily detach from the lower leg. It also forms the primary seal to keep lubrication in and contaminants out. This press fit is the thing that trips many people up when attempting to remove a lower leg. The process of extracting a shaft from its press fit is simple, but because people can’t see it happening, or they don’t even realize there is a press fit, it can get confusing and frustrating. Let’s fix that. You may have seen the step where the bolt is unthreaded a few turns, then struck with a mallet. What this does is allows the bolt to be used as a drift to push the shaft out of its press fit. But if you don’t back the bolt out enough, the drift may not be long enough to fully unseat the shaft. Many times, people will do this, then attempt to remove the leg. Because the shaft is still pressed into the bore just a tiny bit, it won’t release. That’s when all sorts of fun things start to happen. I’ve seen people start hitting the brake arch. DO NOT DO THIS! Look at the back of the arch. See how we’ve scooped out material to reduce weight? Yeah, don’t damage the arch by hitting it with a tool. I’ve also seen people pull up on the lower, for some reason. All this is doing is pressing the shaft back into the bore, which is what you’re trying to do the opposite of. I’ve also seen people put way too much effort into pulling the legs down. This might work, but when it does finally release… well… Instead, after you’ve struck the bolt, back it out another one to two turns, and push on it. If it doesn’t move, strike it again. It’s very rare that the press fit is still engaged at this point. And if it is, I just back the bolt out a little more and strike it again. I do the same on the other side, then I remove the bolts, slide the lower leg off, and let the oil drain. Easy. After a little bit of practice, this process gets much quicker. Ever get sprayed by fluid when removing lower legs? Yep, me too. But why does it spray? Is the air spring leaking into the lower leg? It’s possible, if the air spring needs service. But this happens on the damper side too. So, let’s do a bit of science. Our forks are assembled in the beautiful island country of Taiwan. Our factory in Taiwan is very close to sea level. The air pressure at sea level is 14.7 psi. I live in Colorado Springs, which is at roughly 6000 feet above sea level. The air pressure here is 11.7 psi. What this means is that the pockets of air in the lower legs of a new fork are pressurized to 3 psi higher than the air outside of the fork when I’m working on it. So, when I release the press fit and the lower leg is suddenly unsealed, 3 psi of pressure is pushing against the fluid, forcing it out in a nice jet of shoe-ruining spray. As long as you’re aware of this and you take a couple of precautions, you can avoid a mess. Once you’ve completed whatever service you’re doing, it’s time to put the lower leg back on. One thing I’ve seen people struggle with is getting the upper tubes into the seals. Trying to align both legs into the seals can be a bit tricky. Know that you can deform the lip of the seal a little when doing this, as long as you’re not involving the energizer spring. I usually tuck in the sides of the tubes facing away from me into the seals, then pull the lower leg toward me while angling it onto the upper tubes. 90 percent of the time this works very time. Once the upper tubes are within the seals, continue to slide the lower leg onto the upper tubes until you feel the upper bushings engage, then stop. At this point I make sure that I’ve got enough fluid handy to fill both legs. It doesn’t matter if you use a beaker or a syringe, just as long as you can get the fluid into the bolt holes. Then I orient fork inverted and at a slight angle to put the fluid in. The reason I do this is to prevent the fluid from going into the shafts. Fluid in the shafts means that it’s not where it needs to be, lubricating moving parts. And in some cases, it can prevent a bolt from achieving proper torque by preventing the bolt from threading into the shaft completely. Ever have a shaft spin on you? Check to see if the shaft is full of fluid. If so, pull the lower against the shafts, let the shaft drain, then try again. Should you use a new crush washer every time? Crush washers can be reused. Follow service guidelines to determine at which point in the fork’s service schedule this should or shouldn’t be done. That said, you should at least inspect the crush washer each time you remove a bottom bolt. If any damage is visible, go ahead and replace it. That’s it for lower leg info. For more information about servicing forks, be sure to visit SRAM.com. Take care!