Suspension is a broad term that refers to the parts of the bicycle that absorb shock and vibration produced by terrain features and rider input. Tires are the first components to receive and absorb this input. After that, suspension components might include a suspension fork, a rear shock, the swingarm portion of the bicycle frame, a suspension stem or seatpost, even the saddle, handlebar, and grips have some vibration absorption capability. In this series of videos, we’re going to focus on the shock absorbers, which are the suspension fork and rear shock. We’ll also spend some time discussing frames and how they work in conjunction with the shocks. Before we get into all of the components that are involved with suspension, it’s important that we understand a few basic concepts and terms. First, we should establish why suspension is important on bicycles. There are four fundamental reasons why suspension can make riding more enjoyable, more efficient, and safer. The first is Control. If vibration isn’t isolated by a shock absorber, it gets transmitted to the rider. This could cause the rider’s hands to come off the handlebar, or the rider’s feet to come off the pedals, or put the rider in a position that could cause them to lose control and crash. Control inspires confidence, and confidence allows the rider to improve. Second is comfort. Riding a bike is more enjoyable if it’s comfortable, especially on long rides. Suspension isolates vibration from the rider. A properly tuned suspension can keep the rider moving along a smooth path, regardless of what the terrain looks like. This will enable the rider to focus their energy on pedaling, steering, and having fun without having to think too much about how rough the trail is. Third is Durability. This is similar in concept to comfort, but more for the sake of the bike. Over time, vibration can cause parts to loosen and fatigue. Once again, suspension minimizes this by absorbing the vibration so that it doesn’t get transmitted to the other parts of the bike. The fourth, and most important in terms of suspension performance, setup, and tuning, is Traction. Suspension helps the wheels stay in contact with the ground, which is very important because if the front wheel unweights or comes off the ground, steering doesn’t happen. If the rear wheel unweights or leaves the ground, pedaling no longer provides forward movement. Many of the concepts in this tutorial tie back to maintaining traction, so remember this. Another important point to cover before we go any further relates to the movement of the shock absorber and the wheel. When the shock is at rest without any force acting on it, it’s at a point that we call full extension, or top out. When the shock is completely compressed, it’s at a point that we call full compression, or bottom out. The total distance that the shock can move between top out and bottom out is called stroke. Travel is how much the wheel moves in relation to the rider. On suspension forks, stroke and travel are the same. For rear shocks, this isn’t the case. We’ll discuss this in more detail later in this video series. Shock absorbers consist of three primary components. The first is the spring. This is the component that absorbs and releases energy and isolates it from the rest of the bike and the rider. The second component is the damper. Dampers can actually be broken into two sub-components, the compression and rebound damping circuits. Springs absorb and release energy, but they do so in a relatively uncontrolled manner. A spring will absorb energy as fast as it receives it and release as fast as it’s allowed to. This can be counterproductive when trying to maintain control and traction, so dampers are paired with springs to control how fast a spring is able to compress and rebound. Finally, the Chassis provides a place for the spring and the dampers to live and work together, and to integrate with the bike. The chassis also determines the amount of stroke, since it consists of two parts that move toward each other on compression, contact each other at bottom out, usually with some sort of cushioning bumper in between to prevent harsh impact, then move away from each other on rebound, and finally reach top out, again with some sort of cushion to prevent a harsh impact. In this video series, we’re going to look at each of these components in detail, how they are constructed, how they behave, and how we interact with them. In our next video, we’ll take a look at some of the basic principles of springs.