Because suspension is based on parts moving against each other, friction is unavoidable. Some friction is good. Fluid moving through ports produces a type of friction, which adds control. Otherwise, any component that generates friction can reduce performance in two ways. Static friction, or stiction, can make the suspension feel sticky any time it starts to move. Extreme stiction can make the suspension feet notched or indexed. Dynamic friction, or running friction, generates heat. Both types of friction can be created by seals, bearings, and bushings in the spring system, damper, and chassis. Seals require a certain amount of squeeze in order to do their job. If a seal is used to keep debris or fluid from getting to the wrong area, the squeeze doesn’t have to be that tight. If the fluid is pressurized, the squeeze needs to be tighter. And if the seal is meant to keep pressurized gas in a system, the squeeze needs to pretty tight. Lubrication helps to reduce friction. Keeping the seals clean and lubricated not only reduces friction but help the seals last longer. Eventually, the seal will wear to the point where it can no longer do its job, at which point it should be replaced. Seals can be made from materials of varying durometer, or hardness. Softer seals can conform to sealing surfaces more to provide better sealing, but also produce more friction. Seals can also come in different shapes for different applications. Common types of seal shapes used in suspension are the o-ring, u-cup seal, and quad lip seal, or quad ring. O-rings are simple and very effective for sealing at most pressures, but they also produce the highest amounts of friction due to the size of the sealing surface area when the o-ring is squeezed into place. O-rings can also roll as they begin to move. This can create a momentary difference in feel as the o-ring rolls, then grips, then releases the sealing surface. U-cup seals have a groove in one side, meant to face the area of highest pressure. When pressure is low, the seal doesn’t produce that much squeeze, so friction is low. With higher pressure, the u-channel is pushed outward, creating more squeeze. If used with a spring or damper, u-cups can be effective at reducing stiction during initial stroke, where pressure and squeeze are low. Then it produces more squeeze through the stroke as pressure increases, but stiction is less of a perceptible factor. U-cups are most effective at low to medium-high pressure. However, at really high pressures, the lip of the seal can be pushed back to open a leak path. Also, u-cups are single-direction seals. So, while they are effective at sealing at varying pressures on one side of the seal, if the pressure on the other side is greater, the seal will open. Wiper, or scraper seals are similar to u-cup seals in that one side has a groove that expands with pressure. The difference is that the other side of the seal is wedge-shaped to push debris away from the sealing surfaces. Quad lip seals have two separate sealing surfaces on both the inside and outside of the seal. This is similar to a u-cup, but with bi-directional pressure sensitive sealing capability. An area between the sealing surfaces can also serve as a lubrication reservoir, keeping lubrication localized where it’s needed most. Seals can be dynamic or static. Dynamic seals move, or something moves against them, and they produce friction. Non-dynamic, or static seals, serve similar roles in keeping parts of the system separate, but they don’t move. So, their squeeze can be greater, and they don’t wear during normal operation. Bushings allow parts to move against each other without either part getting damaged. They can be designed to be replaceable if they wear out, or the part that they are installed in can be replaced. Typically, bushings are made of a hard, metallic sleeve with a softer, low friction coating. They can also be made entirely from plastic. The friction material determines how well they slide against the other part. Longer bushings in forks can prevent lubricating fluid from getting to all of the bushing surfaces and seals. So, they’ll typically contain slots or pockets for the fluid to circulate throughout the lower leg. For rear shocks, frame mount bushings or bearings allow the shock to rotate freely in the frame. Larger bushings and bearings provide greater stiffness to prevent binding and sideloading of the shock which can lead to excessive friction and premature wear on many of the shock’s components. Glide rings serve a similar function as bushings. They’re both considered bearings, but bushings tend to contribute to structural rigidity more than glide rings, which will typically have a looser fit and lower friction. In suspension systems, glide rings most often operate in fluid, which reduces friction even more. And as I mentioned earlier, glide rings can also contribute to oil flow control. Similar to seals, bushings and glide rings can operate more smoothly and last longer if kept clean and lubricated. Certain lubricants work well under certain conditions and with certain materials. For example, some greases work well as an assembly lube, but not as well for dynamic friction. Other greases work well as dynamic lubricants, but may not be able to circulate to all of the components properly. And some do acceptably well for both. Some seals are made from chemicals that react negatively to other chemicals in certain greases and fluids. An example of this is certain o-rings can either soften and swell or harden and shrink when exposed to certain chemicals in a fluid. This can have some pretty serious consequences for sealing and friction. For this reason, you should always use the recommended greases and fluids when servicing suspension. Those surfaces that bushings and seals run against can also be treated to reduce friction. Coating processes such as anodization, chrome plating, nitriding, and PTFE impregnation, among others can provide extremely smooth and durable surfaces. In our next video, we’ll look at chassis design and geometry.